*The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Odyssey, by Homer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Odyssey

Author: Homer

Translator: Alexander Pope

Release Date: April, 2002 [eBook #3160]
[Most recently updated: July 18, 2021]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Jim Tinsley, Distributed Proofers and David Widger

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ODYSSEY ***

cover




The Odyssey

by Homer

Translated by Alexander Pope


Contents

 INTRODUCTION.
 THE ODYSSEY OF HOMER
 BOOK I.
 BOOK II.
 BOOK III.
 BOOK IV.
 BOOK V.
 BOOK VI.
 BOOK VII.
 BOOK VIII.
 BOOK IX.
 BOOK X.
 BOOK XI.
 BOOK XII.
 BOOK XIII.
 BOOK XIV.
 BOOK XV.
 BOOK XVI.
 BOOK XVII.
 BOOK XVIII.
 BOOK XIX.
 BOOK XX.
 BOOK XXI.
 BOOK XXII.
 BOOK XXIII.
 BOOK XXIV.




INTRODUCTION.


Scepticism is as much the result of knowledge, as knowledge is of
scepticism. To be content with what we at present know, is, for the
most part, to shut our ears against conviction; since, from the very
gradual character of our education, we must continually forget, and
emancipate ourselves from, knowledge previously acquired; we must set
aside old notions and embrace fresh ones; and, as we learn, we must be
daily unlearning something which it has cost us no small labour and
anxiety to acquire.

And this difficulty attaches itself more closely to an age in which
progress has gained a strong ascendency over prejudice, and in which
persons and things are, day by day, finding their real level, in lieu
of their conventional value. The same principles which have swept away
traditional abuses, and which are making rapid havoc among the revenues
of sinecurists, and stripping the thin, tawdry veil from attractive
superstitions, are working as actively in literature as in society. The
credulity of one writer, or the partiality of another, finds as
powerful a touchstone and as wholesome a chastisement in the healthy
scepticism of a temperate class of antagonists, as the dreams of
conservatism, or the impostures of pluralist sinecures in the Church.
History and tradition, whether of ancient or comparatively recent
times, are subjected to very different handling from that which the
indulgence or credulity of former ages could allow. Mere statements are
jealously watched, and the motives of the writer form as important an
ingredient in the analysis of his history, as the facts he records.
Probability is a powerful and troublesome test; and it is by this
troublesome standard that a large portion of historical evidence is
sifted. Consistency is no less pertinacious and exacting in its
demands. In brief, to write a history, we must know more than mere
facts. Human nature, viewed under an introduction of extended
experience, is the best help to the criticism of human history.
Historical characters can only be estimated by the standard which human
experience, whether actual or traditionary, has furnished. To form
correct views of individuals we must regard them as forming parts of a
great whole*we must measure them by their relation to the mass of
beings by whom they are surrounded; and, in contemplating the incidents
in their lives or condition which tradition has handed down to us, we
must rather consider the general bearing of the whole narrative, than
the respective probability of its details.

It is unfortunate for us, that, of some of the greatest men, we know
least, and talk most. Homer, Socrates, and Shakespere have, perhaps,
contributed more to the intellectual enlightenment of mankind than any
other three writers who could be named, and yet the history of all
three has given rise to a boundless ocean of discussion, which has left
us little save the option of choosing which theory or theories we will
follow. The personality of Shakespere is, perhaps, the only thing in
which critics will allow us to believe without controversy; but upon
everything else, even down to the authorship of plays, there is more or
less of doubt and uncertainty. Of Socrates we know as little as the
contradictions of Plato and Xenophon will allow us to know. He was one
of the _dramatis person*_ in two dramas as unlike in principles as in
style. He appears as the enunciator of opinions as different in their
tone as those of the writers who have handed them down. When we have
read Plato _or_ Xenophon, we think we know something of Socrates; when
we have fairly read and examined both, we feel convinced that we are
something worse than ignorant.

It has been an easy, and a popular expedient of late years, to deny the
personal or real existence of men and things whose life and condition
were too much for our belief. This system*which has often comforted the
religious sceptic, and substituted the consolations of Strauss for
those of the New Testament*has been of incalculable value to the
historical theorists of the last and present centuries. To question the
existence of Alexander the Great, would be a more excusable act, than
to believe in that of Romulus. To deny a fact related in Herodotus,
because it is inconsistent with a theory developed from an Assyrian
inscription which no two scholars read in the same way, is more
pardonable, than to believe in the good-natured old king whom the
elegant pen of Florian has idealized*_Numa Pompilius_.

Scepticism has attained its culminating point with respect to Homer,
and the state of our Homeric knowledge may be described as a free
permission to believe any theory, provided we throw overboard all
written tradition, concerning the author or authors of the Iliad and
Odyssey. What few authorities exist on the subject, are summarily
dismissed, although the arguments appear to run in a circle. *This
cannot be true, because it is not true; and that is not true, because
it cannot be true.* Such seems to be the style, in which testimony upon
testimony, statement upon statement, is consigned to denial and
oblivion.

It is, however, unfortunate that the professed biographies of Homer are
partly forgeries, partly freaks of ingenuity and imagination, in which
truth is the requisite most wanting. Before taking a brief review of
the Homeric theory in its present conditions, some notice must be taken
of the treatise on the Life of Homer which has been attributed to
Herodotus.

According to this document, the city of Cumae in AEolia was, at an
early period, the seat of frequent immigrations from various parts of
Greece. Among the immigrants was Menapolus, the son of Ithagenes.
Although poor, he married, and the result of the union was a girl named
Critheis. The girl was left an orphan at an early age, under the
guardianship of Cleanax, of Argos. It is to the indiscretion of this
maiden that we *are indebted for so much happiness.* Homer was the
first fruit of her juvenile frailty, and received the name of
Melesigenes from having been born near the river Meles in B*otia,
whither Critheis had been transported in order to save her reputation.

*At this time,* continues our narrative, *there lived at Smyrna a man
named Phemius, a teacher of literature and music, who, not being
married, engaged Critheis to manage his household, and spin the flax he
received as the price of his scholastic labours. So satisfactory was
her performance of this task, and so modest her conduct, that he made
proposals of marriage, declaring himself, as a further inducement,
willing to adopt her son, who, he asserted, would become a clever man,
if he were carefully brought up.*

They were married; careful cultivation ripened the talents which nature
had bestowed, and Melesigenes soon surpassed his schoolfellows in every
attainment, and, when older, rivalled his preceptor in wisdom. Phemius
died, leaving him sole heir to his property, and his mother soon
followed. Melesigenes carried on his adopted father*s school with great
success, exciting the admiration not only of the inhabitants of Smyrna,
but also of the strangers whom the trade carried on there, especially
in the exportation of corn, attracted to that city. Among these
visitors, one Mentes, from Leucadia, the modern Santa Maura, who
evinced a knowledge and intelligence rarely found in those times,
persuaded Melesigenes to close his school, and accompany him on his
travels. He promised not only to pay his expenses, but to furnish him
with a further stipend, urging, that, *While he was yet young, it was
fitting that he should see with his own eyes the countries and cities
which might hereafter be the subjects of his discourses.* Melesigenes
consented, and set out with his patron, *examining all the curiosities
of the countries they visited, and informing himself of everything by
interrogating those whom he met.* We may also suppose, that he wrote
memoirs of all that he deemed worthy of preservation. Having set sail
from Tyrrhenia and Iberia, they reached Ithaca. Here Melesigenes, who
had already suffered in his eyes, became much worse; and Mentes, who
was about to leave for Leucadia, left him to the medical
superintendence of a friend of his, named Mentor, the son of Alcinor.
Under his hospitable and intelligent host, Melesigenes rapidly became
acquainted with the legends respecting Ulysses, which afterwards formed
the subject of the Odyssey. The inhabitants of Ithaca assert, that it
was here that Melesigenes became blind, but the Colophonians make their
city the seat of that misfortune. He then returned to Smyrna, where he
applied himself to the study of poetry.

But poverty soon drove him to Cumae. Having passed over the Hermaean
plain, he arrived at Neon Teichos, the New Wall, a colony of Cumae.
Here his misfortunes and poetical talent gained him the friendship of
one Tychias, an armourer. *And up to my time,* continues the author,
*the inhabitants showed the place where he used to sit when giving a
recitation of his verses; and they greatly honoured the spot. Here also
a poplar grew, which they said had sprung up ever since Melesigenes
arrived.*

But poverty still drove him on, and he went by way of Larissa, as being
the most convenient road. Here, the Cumans say, he composed an epitaph
on Gordius, king of Phrygia, which has however, and with greater
probability, been attributed to Cleobulus of Lindus.

Arrived at Cumae, he frequented the _conversaziones_ of the old men,
and delighted all by the charms of his poetry. Encouraged by this
favourable reception, he declared that, if they would allow him a
public maintenance, he would render their city most gloriously
renowned. They avowed their willingness to support him in the measure
he proposed, and procured him an audience in the council. Having made
the speech, with the purport of which our author has forgotten to
acquaint us, he retired, and left them to debate respecting the answer
to be given to his proposal.

The greater part of the assembly seemed favourable to the poet*s
demand, but one man *observed that if they were to feed _Homers_, they
would be encumbered with a multitude of useless people.* *From this
circumstance,* says the writer, *Melesigenes acquired the name of
Homer, for the Cumans call blind men _Homers_.* With a love of economy,
which shows how similar the world has always been in its treatment of
literary men, the pension was denied, and the poet vented his
disappointment in a wish that Cumae might never produce a poet capable
of giving it renown and glory.

At Phocaea Homer was destined to experience another literary distress.
One Thestorides, who aimed at the reputation of poetical genius, kept
Homer in his own house, and allowed him a pittance, on condition of the
verses of the poet passing in his name. Having collected sufficient
poetry to be profitable, Thestorides, like some would-be literary
publishers, neglected the man whose brains he had sucked, and left him.
At his departure, Homer is said to have observed: *O Thestorides, of
the many things hidden from the knowledge of man, nothing is more
unintelligible than the human heart.*

Homer continued his career of difficulty and distress, until some Chian
merchants, struck by the similarity of the verses they heard him
recite, acquainted him with the fact that Thestorides was pursuing a
profitable livelihood by the recital of the very same poems. This at
once determined him to set out for Chios. No vessel happened then to be
setting sail thither, but he found one ready to start for Erythrae, a
town of Ionia, which faces that island, and he prevailed upon the
seamen to allow him to accompany them. Having embarked, he invoked a
favourable wind, and prayed that he might be able to expose the
imposture of Thestorides, who, by his breach of hospitality, had drawn
down the wrath of Jove the Hospitable.

At Erythrae, Homer fortunately met with a person who had known him in
Phocaea, by whose assistance he at length, after some difficulty,
reached the little hamlet of Pithys. Here he met with an adventure,
which we will continue in the words of our author. *Having set out from
Pithys, Homer went on, attracted by the cries of some goats that were
pasturing. The dogs barked on his approach, and he cried out. Glaucus
(for that was the name of the goat-herd) heard his voice, ran up
quickly, called off his dogs, and drove them away from Homer. For some
time he stood wondering how a blind man should have reached such a
place alone, and what could be his design in coming. He then went up to
him and inquired who he was, and how he had come to desolate places and
untrodden spots, and of what he stood in need. Homer, by recounting to
him the whole history of his misfortunes, moved him with compassion;
and he took him and led him to his cot, and, having lit a fire, bade
him sup.

*The dogs, instead of eating, kept barking at the stranger, according
to their usual habit. Whereupon Homer addressed Glaucus thus: O
Glaucus, my friend, prythee attend to my behest. First give the dogs
their supper at the doors of the hut: for so it is better, since,
whilst they watch, nor thief nor wild beast will approach the fold.

*Glaucus was pleased with the advice and marvelled at its author.
Having finished supper, they banqueted afresh on conversation, Homer
narrating his wanderings, and telling of the cities he had visited.

*At length they retired to rest; but on the following morning, Glaucus
resolved to go to his master, and acquaint him with his meeting with
Homer. Having left the goats in charge of a fellow-servant, he left
Homer at home, promising to return quickly. Having arrived at Bolissus,
a place near the farm, and finding his mate, he told him the whole
story respecting Homer and his journey. He paid little attention to
what he said, and blamed Glaucus for his stupidity in taking in and
feeding maimed and enfeebled persons. However, he bade him bring the
stranger to him.

*Glaucus told Homer what had taken place, and bade him follow him,
assuring him that good fortune would be the result. Conversation soon
showed that the stranger was a man of much cleverness and general
knowledge, and the Chian persuaded him to remain, and to undertake the
charge of his children.*

Besides the satisfaction of driving the impostor Thestorides from the
island, Homer enjoyed considerable success as a teacher. In the town of
Chios he established a school, where he taught the precepts of poetry.
*To this day,* says Chandler, *the most curious remain is that which
has been named, without reason, the School of Homer. It is on the
coast, at some distance from the city, northward, and appears to have
been an open temple of Cybele, formed on the top of a rock. The shape
is oval, and in the centre is the image of the goddess, the head and an
arm wanting. She is represented, as usual, sitting. The chair has a
lion carved on each side, and on the back. The area is bounded by a low
rim, or seat, and about five yards over. The whole is hewn out of the
mountain, is rude, indistinct, and probably of the most remote
antiquity.*

So successful was this school, that Homer realised a considerable
fortune. He married, and had two daughters, one of whom died single,
the other married a Chian.

The following passage betrays the same tendency to connect the
personages of the poems with the history of the poet, which has already
been mentioned:*

*In his poetical compositions Homer displays great gratitude towards
Mentor of Ithaca, in the Odyssey, whose name he has inserted in his
poem as the companion of Ulysses, in return for the care taken of him
when afflicted with blindness. He also testifies his gratitude to
Phemius, who had given him both sustenance and instruction.*

His celebrity continued to increase, and many persons advised him to
visit Greece whither his reputation had now extended. Having, it is
said, made some additions to his poems calculated to please the vanity
of the Athenians, of whose city he had hitherto made no mention, he set
out for Samos. Here, being recognized by a Samian, who had met with him
in Chios, he was handsomely received, and invited to join in
celebrating the Apaturian festival. He recited some verses, which gave
great satisfaction, and by singing the Eiresione at the New Moon
festivals, he earned a subsistence, visiting the houses of the rich,
with whose children he was very popular.

In the spring he sailed for Athens, and arrived at the island of Ios,
now Ino, where he fell extremely ill, and died. It is said that his
death arose from vexation, at not having been able to unravel an enigma
proposed by some fishermen*s children.

Such is, in brief, the substance of the earliest life of Homer we
possess, and so broad are the evidences of its historical
worthlessness, that it is scarcely necessary to point them out in
detail. Let us now consider some of the opinions to which a
persevering, patient, and learned*but by no means consistent*series of
investigations has led. In doing so, I profess to bring forward
statements, not to vouch for their reasonableness or probability.

*Homer appeared. The history of this poet and his works is lost in
doubtful obscurity, as is the history of many of the first minds who
have done honour to humanity, because they rose amidst darkness. The
majestic stream of his song, blessing and fertilizing, flows like the
Nile, through many lands and nations; and, like the sources of the
Nile, its fountains will ever remain concealed.*

Such are the words in which one of the most judicious German critics
has eloquently described the uncertainty in which the whole of the
Homeric question is involved. With no less truth and feeling he
proceeds:*

*It seems here of chief importance to expect no more than the nature of
things makes possible. If the period of tradition in history is the
region of twilight, we should not expect in it perfect light. The
creations of genius always seem like miracles, because they are, for
the most part, created far out of the reach of observation. If we were
in possession of all the historical testimonies, we never could wholly
explain the origin of the Iliad and the Odyssey; for their origin, in
all essential points, must have remained the secret of the poet.*

From this criticism, which shows as much insight into the depths of
human nature as into the minute wire-drawings of scholastic
investigation, let us pass on to the main question at issue. Was Homer
an individual? or were the Iliad and Odyssey the result of an ingenious
arrangement of fragments by earlier poets?

Well has Landor remarked: *Some tell us there were twenty Homers; some
deny that there was ever one. It were idle and foolish to shake the
contents of a vase, in order to let them settle at last. We are
perpetually labouring to destroy our delights, our composure, our
devotion to superior power. Of all the animals on earth we least know
what is good for us. My opinion is, that what is best for us is our
admiration of good. No man living venerates Homer more than I do.*

But, greatly as we admire the generous enthusiasm which rests contented
with the poetry on which its best impulses had been nurtured and
fostered, without seeking to destroy the vividness of first impressions
by minute analysis, our editorial office compels us to give some
attention to the doubts and difficulties with which the Homeric
question is beset, and to entreat our reader, for a brief period, to
prefer his judgment to his imagination, and to condescend to dry
details. Before, however, entering into particulars respecting the
question of this unity of the Homeric poems, (at least of the Iliad,) I
must express my sympathy with the sentiments expressed in the following
remarks:*

*We cannot but think the universal admiration of its unity by the
better, the poetic age of Greece, almost conclusive testimony to its
original composition. It was not till the age of the grammarians that
its primitive integrity was called in question; nor is it injustice to
assert, that the minute and analytical spirit of a grammarian is not
the best qualification for the profound feeling, the comprehensive
conception of an harmonious whole. The most exquisite anatomist may be
no judge of the symmetry of the human frame; and we would take the
opinion of Chantrey or Westmacott on the proportions and general beauty
of a form, rather than that of Mr. Brodie or Sir Astley Cooper.

*There is some truth, though some malicious exaggeration, in the lines
of Pope:*

**The critic eye*that microscope of wit*
Sees hairs and pores, examines bit by bit;
How parts relate to parts, or they to whole.
The body*s harmony, the beaming soul,
Are things which Kuster, Burmann, Wasse, shall see,
When man*s whole frame is obvious to a flea.**


Long was the time which elapsed before any one dreamt of questioning
the unity of the authorship of the Homeric poems. The grave and
cautious Thucydides quoted without hesitation the Hymn to Apollo, the
authenticity of which has been already disclaimed by modern critics.
Longinus, in an oft-quoted passage, merely expressed an opinion
touching the comparative inferiority of the Odyssey to the Iliad; and,
among a mass of ancient authors, whose very names it would be tedious
to detail, no suspicion of the personal non-existence of Homer ever
arose. So far, the voice of antiquity seems to be in favour of our
early ideas on the subject: let us now see what are the discoveries to
which more modern investigations lay claim.

At the end of the seventeenth century, doubts had begun to awaken on
the subject, and we find Bentley remarking that *Homer wrote a sequel
of songs and rhapsodies, to be sung by himself, for small comings and
good cheer, at festivals and other days of merriment. These loose songs
were not collected together, in the form of an epic poem, till about
Peisistratus* time, about five hundred years after.*

Two French writers*Hedelin and Perrault*avowed a similar scepticism on
the subject; but it is in the *Scienza Nuova* of Battista Vico, that we
first meet with the germ of the theory, subsequently defended by Wolf
with so much learning and acuteness. Indeed, it is with the Wolfian
theory that we have chiefly to deal, and with the following bold
hypothesis, which we will detail in the words of Grote:*

*Half a century ago, the acute and valuable Prolegomena of F. A. Wolf,
turning to account the Venetian Scholia, which had then been recently
published, first opened philosophical discussion as to the history of
the Homeric text. A considerable part of that dissertation (though by
no means the whole) is employed in vindicating the position, previously
announced by Bentley, amongst others, that the separate constituent
portions of the Iliad and Odyssey had not been cemented together into
any compact body and unchangeable order, until the days of
Peisistratus, in the sixth century before Christ. As a step towards
that conclusion, Wolf maintained that no written copies of either poem
could be shown to have existed during the earlier times, to which their
composition is referred; and that without writing, neither the perfect
symmetry of so complicated a work could have been originally conceived
by any poet, nor, if realized by him, transmitted with assurance to
posterity. The absence of easy and convenient writing, such as must be
indispensably supposed for long manuscripts, among the early Greeks,
was thus one of the points in Wolf*s case against the primitive
integrity of the Iliad and Odyssey. By Nitzsch, and other leading
opponents of Wolf, the connection of the one with the other seems to
have been accepted as he originally put it; and it has been considered
incumbent on those who defended the ancient aggregate character of the
Iliad and Odyssey, to maintain that they were written poems from the
beginning.

*To me it appears, that the architectonic functions ascribed by Wolf to
Peisistratus and his associates, in reference to the Homeric poems, are
nowise admissible. But much would undoubtedly be gained towards that
view of the question, if it could be shown, that, in order to
controvert it, we were driven to the necessity of admitting long
written poems, in the ninth century before the Christian aera. Few
things, in my opinion, can be more improbable; and Mr. Payne Knight,
opposed as he is to the Wolfian hypothesis, admits this no less than
Wolf himself. The traces of writing in Greece, even in the seventh
century before the Christian aera, are exceedingly trifling. We have no
remaining inscription earlier than the fortieth Olympiad, and the early
inscriptions are rude and unskilfully executed; nor can we even assure
ourselves whether Archilochus, Simonides of Amorgus, Kallinus Tyrtaeus,
Xanthus, and the other early elegiac and lyric poets, committed their
compositions to writing, or at what time the practice of doing so
became familiar. The first positive ground which authorizes us to
presume the existence of a manuscript of Homer, is in the famous
ordinance of Solon, with regard to the rhapsodies at the Panathenaea:
but for what length of time previously manuscripts had existed, we are
unable to say.

*Those who maintain the Homeric poems to have been written from the
beginning, rest their case, not upon positive proofs, nor yet upon the
existing habits of society with regard to poetry*for they admit
generally that the Iliad and Odyssey were not read, but recited and
heard,*but upon the supposed necessity that there must have been
manuscripts to ensure the preservation of the poems*the unassisted
memory of reciters being neither sufficient nor trustworthy. But here
we only escape a smaller difficulty by running into a greater; for the
existence of trained bards, gifted with extraordinary memory, is far
less astonishing than that of long manuscripts, in an age essentially
non-reading and non-writing, and when even suitable instruments and
materials for the process are not obvious. Moreover, there is a strong
positive reason for believing that the bard was under no necessity of
refreshing his memory by consulting a manuscript; for if such had been
the fact, blindness would have been a disqualification for the
profession, which we know that it was not, as well from the example of
Demodokus, in the Odyssey, as from that of the blind bard of Chios, in
the Hymn to the Delian Apollo, whom Thucydides, as well as the general
tenor of Grecian legend, identifies with Homer himself. The author of
that hymn, be he who he may, could never have described a blind man as
attaining the utmost perfection in his art, if he had been conscious
that the memory of the bard was only maintained by constant reference
to the manuscript in his chest.*

The loss of the digamma, that _crux_ of critics, that quicksand upon
which even the acumen of Bentley was shipwrecked, seems to prove beyond
a doubt, that the pronunciation of the Greek language had undergone a
considerable change. Now it is certainly difficult to suppose that the
Homeric poems could have suffered by this change, had written copies
been preserved. If Chaucer*s poetry, for instance, had not been
written, it could only have come down to us in a softened form, more
like the effeminate version of Dryden, than the rough, quaint, noble
original.

*At what period,* continues Grote, *these poems, or indeed any other
Greek poems, first began to be written, must be matter of conjecture,
though there is ground for assurance that it was before the time of
Solon. If, in the absence of evidence, we may venture upon naming any
more determinate period, the question at once suggests itself, What
were the purposes which, in that state of society, a manuscript at its
first commencement must have been intended to answer? For whom was a
written Iliad necessary? Not for the rhapsodes; for with them it was
not only planted in the memory, but also interwoven with the feelings,
and conceived in conjunction with all those flexions and intonations of
voice, pauses, and other oral artifices which were required for
emphatic delivery, and which the naked manuscript could never
reproduce. Not for the general public*they were accustomed to receive
it with its rhapsodic delivery, and with its accompaniments of a solemn
and crowded festival. The only persons for whom the written Iliad would
be suitable would be a select few; studious and curious men; a class of
readers capable of analyzing the complicated emotions which they had
experienced as hearers in the crowd, and who would, on perusing the
written words, realize in their imaginations a sensible portion of the
impression communicated by the reciter. Incredible as the statement may
seem in an age like the present, there is in all early societies, and
there was in early Greece, a time when no such reading class existed.
If we could discover at what time such a class first began to be
formed, we should be able to make a guess at the time when the old epic
poems were first committed to writing. Now the period which may with
the greatest probability be fixed upon as having first witnessed the
formation even of the narrowest reading class in Greece, is the middle
of the seventh century before the Christian aera (B.C. 660 to B.C.
630), the age of Terpander, Kallinus, Archilochus, Simenides of
Amorgus, &c. I ground this supposition on the change then operated in
the character and tendencies of Grecian poetry and music*the elegiac
and the iambic measures having been introduced as rivals to the
primitive hexameter, and poetical compositions having been transferred
from the epical past to the affairs of present and real life. Such a
change was important at a time when poetry was the only known mode of
publication (to use a modern phrase not altogether suitable, yet the
nearest approaching to the sense). It argued a new way of looking at
the old epical treasures of the people, as well as a thirst for new
poetical effect; and the men who stood forward in it may well be
considered as desirous to study, and competent to criticize, from their
own individual point of view, the written words of the Homeric
rhapsodies, just as we are told that Kallinus both noticed and
eulogized the Thebais as the production of Homer. There seems,
therefore, ground for conjecturing that (for the use of this
newly-formed and important, but very narrow class), manuscripts of the
Homeric poems and other old epics,*the Thebais and the Cypria, as well
as the Iliad and the Odyssey,*began to be compiled towards the middle
of the seventh century B.C.; and the opening of Egypt to Grecian
commerce, which took place about the same period, would furnish
increased facilities for obtaining the requisite papyrus to write upon.
A reading class, when once formed, would doubtless slowly increase, and
the number of manuscripts along with it: so that before the time of
Solon, fifty years afterwards, both readers and manuscripts, though
still comparatively few, might have attained a certain recognized
authority, and formed a tribunal of reference against the carelessness
of individual rhapsodies.*

But even Peisistratus has not been suffered to remain in possession of
the credit, and we cannot help feeling the force of the following
observations:*

*There are several incidental circumstances which, in our opinion,
throw some suspicion over the whole history of the Peisistratid
compilation, at least over the theory that the Iliad was cast into its
present stately and harmonious form by the directions of the Athenian
ruler. If the great poets, who flourished at the bright period of
Grecian song, of which, alas! we have inherited little more than the
fame, and the faint echo; if Stesichorus, Anacreon, and Simonides were
employed in the noble task of compiling the Iliad and Odyssey, so much
must have been done to arrange, to connect, to harmonize, that it is
almost incredible that stronger marks of Athenian manufacture should
not remain. Whatever occasional anomalies may be detected, anomalies
which no doubt arise out of our own ignorance of the language of the
Homeric age; however the irregular use of the digamma may have
perplexed our Bentleys, to whom the name of Helen is said to have
caused as much disquiet and distress as the fair one herself among the
heroes of her age; however Mr. Knight may have failed in reducing the
Homeric language to its primitive form; however, finally, the Attic
dialect may not have assumed all its more marked and distinguishing
characteristics:*still it is difficult to suppose that the language,
particularly in the joinings and transitions, and connecting parts,
should not more clearly betray the incongruity between the more ancient
and modern forms of expression. It is not quite in character with such
a period to imitate an antique style, in order to piece out an
imperfect poem in the character of the original, as Sir Walter Scott
has done in his continuation of Sir Tristram.

*If, however, not even such faint and indistinct traces of Athenian
compilation are discoverable in the language of the poems, the total
absence of Athenian national feeling is perhaps no less worthy of
observation. In later, and it may fairly be suspected in earlier times,
the Athenians were more than ordinarily jealous of the fame of their
ancestors. But, amid all the traditions of the glories of early Greece
embodied in the Iliad, the Athenians play a most subordinate and
insignificant part. Even the few passages which relate to their
ancestors, Mr. Knight suspects to be interpolations. It is possible,
indeed, that in its leading outline, the Iliad may be true to historic
fact; that in the great maritime expedition of western Greece against
the rival and half-kindred empire of the Laomedontiadae, the chieftain
of Thessaly, from his valour and the number of his forces, may have
been the most important ally of the Peloponnesian sovereign: the
pre-eminent value of the ancient poetry on the Trojan war may thus have
forced the national feeling of the Athenians to yield to their taste.
The songs which spoke of their own great ancestor were, no doubt, of
far inferior sublimity and popularity, or, at first sight, a Theseid
would have been much more likely to have emanated from an Athenian
synod of compilers of ancient song, than an Achilleid or an Odysseid.
Could France have given birth to a Tasso, Tancred would have been the
hero of the Jerusalem. If, however, the Homeric ballads, as they are
sometimes called, which related the wrath of Achilles, with all its
direful consequences, were so far superior to the rest of the poetic
cycle, as to admit no rivalry,*it is still surprising, that throughout
the whole poem the _callida junctura_ should never betray the
workmanship of an Athenian hand; and that the national spirit of a
race, who have at a later period not inaptly been compared to our
self-admiring neighbours, the French, should submit with lofty
self-denial to the almost total exclusion of their own ancestors*or, at
least, to the questionable dignity of only having produced a leader
tolerably skilled in the military tactics of his age.*

To return to the Wolfian theory. While it is to be confessed, that
Wolf*s objections to the primitive integrity of the Iliad and Odyssey
have never been wholly got over, we cannot help discovering that they
have failed to enlighten us as to any substantial point, and that the
difficulties with which the whole subject is beset, are rather
augmented than otherwise, if we admit his hypothesis. Nor is Lachmann*s
modification of his theory any better. He divides the first twenty-two
books of the Iliad into sixteen different songs, and treats as
ridiculous the belief that their amalgamation into one regular poem
belongs to a period earlier than the age of Peisistratus. This as Grote
observes, *ex-plains the gaps and contradictions in the narrative, but
it explains nothing else.* Moreover, we find no contradictions
warranting this belief, and the so-called sixteen poets concur in
getting rid of the following leading men in the first battle after the
secession of Achilles: Elphenor, chief of the Euboeans; Tlepolemus, of
the Rhodians; Pandarus, of the Lycians; Odins, of the Halizonians:
Pirous and Acamas, of the Thracians. None of these heroes again make
their appearance, and we can but agree with Colonel Mure, that *it
seems strange that any number of independent poets should have so
harmoniously dispensed with the services of all six in the sequel.* The
discrepancy, by which Pylaemenes, who is represented as dead in the
fifth book, weeps at his son*s funeral in the thirteenth, can only be
regarded as the result of an interpolation.

Grote, although not very distinct in stating his own opinions on the
subject, has done much to clearly show the incongruity of the Wolfian
theory, and of Lachmann*s modifications, with the character of
Peisistratus. But he has also shown, and we think with equal success,
that the two questions relative to the primitive unity of these poems,
or, supposing that impossible, the unison of these parts by
Peisistratus, and not before his time, are essentially distinct. In
short, *a man may believe the Iliad to have been put together out of
pre-existing songs, without recognising the age of Peisistratus as the
period of its first compilation.* The friends or literary _employ*s_ of
Peisistratus must have found an Iliad that was already ancient, and the
silence of the Alexandrine critics respecting the Peisistratic
*recension,* goes far to prove, that, among the numerous manuscripts
they examined, this was either wanting, or thought unworthy of
attention.

*Moreover,* he continues, *the whole tenor of the poems themselves
confirms what is here remarked. There is nothing, either in the Iliad
or Odyssey, which savours of modernism, applying that term to the age
of Peisistratus*nothing which brings to our view the alterations
brought about by two centuries, in the Greek language, the coined
money, the habits of writing and reading, the despotisms and republican
governments, the close military array, the improved construction of
ships, the Amphiktyonic convocations, the mutual frequentation of
religious festivals, the Oriental and Egyptian veins of religion, &c.,
familiar to the latter epoch. These alterations Onomakritus, and the
other literary friends of Peisistratus, could hardly have failed to
notice, even without design, had they then, for the first time,
undertaken the task of piecing together many self-existent epics into
one large aggregate. Everything in the two great Homeric poems, both in
substance and in language, belongs to an age two or three centuries
earlier than Peisistratus. Indeed, even the interpolations (or those
passages which, on the best grounds, are pronounced to be such) betray
no trace of the sixth century before Christ, and may well have been
heard by Archilochus and Kallinus*in some cases even by Arktinus and
Hesiod*as genuine Homeric matter. As far as the evidences on the case,
as well internal as external, enable us to judge, we seem warranted in
believing that the Iliad and Odyssey were recited substantially as they
now stand (always allowing for partial divergences of text and
interpolations) in 776 B.C., our first trustworthy mark of Grecian
time; and this ancient date, let it be added, as it is the
best-authenticated fact, so it is also the most important attribute of
the Homeric poems, considered in reference to Grecian history; for they
thus afford us an insight into the anti-historical character of the
Greeks, enabling us to trace the subsequent forward march of the
nation, and to seize instructive contrasts between their former and
their later condition.*

On the whole, I am inclined to believe, that the labours of
Peisistratus were wholly of an editorial character, although I must
confess that I can lay down nothing respecting the extent of his
labours. At the same time, so far from believing that the composition
or primary arrangement of these poems, in their present form, was the
work of Peisistratus, I am rather persuaded that the fine taste and
elegant, mind of that Athenian would lead him to preserve an ancient
and traditional order of the poems, rather than to patch and
reconstruct them according to a fanciful hypothesis. I will not repeat
the many discussions respecting whether the poems were written or not,
or whether the art of writing was known in the time of their reputed
author. Suffice it to say, that the more we read, the less satisfied we
are upon either subject.

I cannot, however, help thinking, that the story which attributes the
preservation of these poems to Lycurgus, is little else than a version
of the same story as that of Peisistratus, while its historical
probability must be measured by that of many others relating to the
Spartan Confucius.

I will conclude this sketch of the Homeric theories with an attempt,
made by an ingenious friend, to unite them into something like
consistency. It is as follows:*

*No doubt the common soldiers of that age had, like the common sailors
of some fifty years ago, some one qualified to *discourse in excellent
music* among them. Many of these, like those of the negroes in the
United States, were extemporaneous, and allusive to events passing
around them. But what was passing around them? The grand events of a
spirit-stirring war; occurrences likely to impress themselves, as the
mystical legends of former times had done, upon their memory; besides
which, a retentive memory was deemed a virtue of the first water, and
was cultivated accordingly in those ancient times. Ballads at first,
and down to the beginning of the war with Troy, were merely
recitations, with an intonation. Then followed a species of recitative,
probably with an intoned burden. Tune next followed, as it aided the
memory considerably.

*It was at this period, about four hundred years after the war, that a
poet flourished of the name of Melesigenes, or Moeonides, but most
probably the former. He saw that these ballads might be made of great
utility to his purpose of writing a poem on the social position of
Hellas, and, as a collection, he published these lays connecting them
by a tale of his own. This poem now exists, under the title of the
*Odyssea.* The author, however, did not affix his own name to the poem,
which, in fact, was, great part of it, remodelled from the archaic
dialect of Crete, in which tongue the ballads were found by him. He
therefore called it the poem of Homeros, or the Collector; but this is
rather a proof of his modesty and talent, than of his mere drudging
arrangement of other people*s ideas; for, as Grote has finely observed,
arguing for the unity of authorship, *a great poet might have re-cast
pre-existing separate songs into one comprehensive whole; but no mere
arrangers or compilers would be competent to do so.*

*While employed on the wild legend of Odysseus, he met with a ballad,
recording the quarrel of Achilles and Agamemnon. His noble mind seized
the hint that there presented itself, and the Achilleis grew under his
hand. Unity of design, however, caused him to publish the poem under
the same pseudonyme as his former work; and the disjointed lays of the
ancient bards were joined together, like those relating to the Cid,
into a chronicle history, named the Iliad. Melesigenes knew that the
poem was destined to be a lasting one, and so it has proved; but,
first, the poems were destined to undergo many vicissitudes and
corruptions, by the people who took to singing them in the streets,
assemblies, and agoras. However, Solon first, and then Peisistratus,
and afterwards Aristoteles and others, revised the poems, and restored
the works of Melesigenes Homeros to their original integrity in a great
measure.*

Having thus given some general notion of the strange theories which
have developed themselves respecting this most interesting subject, I
must still express my conviction as to the unity of the authorship of
the Homeric poems. To deny that many corruptions and interpolations
disfigure them, and that the intrusive hand of the poetasters may here
and there have inflicted a wound more serious than the negligence of
the copyist, would be an absurd and captious assumption; but it is to a
higher criticism that we must appeal, if we would either understand or
enjoy these poems. In maintaining the authenticity and personality of
their one author, be he Homer or Melesigenes, _quocunque nomine vocari
eum jus fasque sit_, I feel conscious that, while the whole weight of
historical evidence is against the hypothesis which would assign these
great works to a plurality of authors, the most powerful internal
evidence, and that which springs from the deepest and most immediate
impulse of the soul, also speaks eloquently to the contrary.

The minutiae of verbal criticism I am far from seeking to despise.
Indeed, considering the character of some of my own books, such an
attempt would be gross inconsistency. But, while I appreciate its
importance in a philological view, I am inclined to set little store on
its aesthetic value, especially in poetry. Three parts of the
emendations made upon poets are mere alterations, some of which, had
they been suggested to the author by his Maecenas or Africanus, he
would probably have adopted. Moreover, those who are most exact in
laying down rules of verbal criticism and interpretation, are often
least competent to carry out their own precepts. Grammarians are not
poets by profession, but may be so _per accidens_. I do not at this
moment remember two emendations on Homer, calculated to substantially
improve the poetry of a passage, although a mass of remarks, from
Herodotus down to Loewe, have given us the history of a thousand minute
points, without which our Greek knowledge would be gloomy and jejune.

But it is not on words only that grammarians, mere grammarians, will
exercise their elaborate and often tiresome ingenuity. Binding down an
heroic or dramatic poet to the block upon which they have previously
dissected his words and sentences, they proceed to use the axe and the
pruning knife by wholesale; and, inconsistent in everything but their
wish to make out a case of unlawful affiliation, they cut out book
after book, passage after passage, till the author is reduced to a
collection of fragments, or till those who fancied they possessed the
works of some great man, find that they have been put off with a vile
counterfeit got up at second hand. If we compare the theories of
Knight, Wolf, Lachmann; and others, we shall feel better satisfied of
the utter uncertainty of criticism than of the apocryphal position of
Homer. One rejects what another considers the turning-point of his
theory. One cuts a supposed knot by expunging what another would
explain by omitting something else.

Nor is this morbid species of sagacity by any means to be looked upon
as a literary novelty. Justus Lipsius, a scholar of no ordinary skill,
seems to revel in the imaginary discovery, that the tragedies
attributed to Seneca are by _four_ different authors. Now, I will
venture to assert, that these tragedies are so uniform, not only in
their borrowed phraseology*a phraseology with which writers like
Boethius and Saxo Grammaticus were more charmed than ourselves*in their
freedom from real poetry, and last, but not least, in an ultra-refined
and consistent abandonment of good taste, that few writers of the
present day would question the capabilities of the same gentleman, be
he Seneca or not, to produce not only these, but a great many more
equally bad. With equal sagacity, Father Hardouin astonished the world
with the startling announcement that the AEneid of Virgil, and the
satires of Horace, were literary deceptions. Now, without wishing to
say one word of disrespect against the industry and learning*nay, the
refined acuteness*which scholars like Wolf have bestowed upon this
subject, I must express my fears, that many of our modern Homeric
theories will become matter for the surprise and entertainment, rather
than the instruction, of posterity. Nor can I help thinking that the
literary history of more recent times will account for many points of
difficulty in the transmission of the Iliad and Odyssey to a period so
remote from that of their first creation.

I have already expressed my belief that the labours of Peisistratus
were of a purely editorial character; and there seems no more reason
why corrupt and imperfect editions of Homer may not have been abroad in
his day, than that the poems of Valerius Flaccus and Tibullus should
have given so much trouble to Poggio, Scaliger, and others. But, after
all, the main fault in all the Homeric theories is, that they demand
too great a sacrifice of those feelings to which poetry most powerfully
appeals, and which are its most fitting judges. The ingenuity which has
sought to rob us of the name and existence of Homer, does too much
violence to that inward emotion, which makes our whole soul yearn with
love and admiration for the blind bard of Chios. To believe the author
of the Iliad a mere compiler, is to degrade the powers of human
invention; to elevate analytical judgment at the expense of the most
ennobling impulses of the soul; and to forget the ocean in the
contemplation of a polypus. There is a catholicity, so to speak, in the
very name of Homer. Our faith in the author of the Iliad may be a
mistaken one, but as yet nobody has taught us a better.

While, however, I look upon the belief in Homer as one that has nature
herself for its mainspring; while I can join with old Ennius in
believing in Homer as the ghost, who, like some patron saint, hovers
round the bed of the poet, and even bestows rare gifts from that wealth
of imagination which a host of imitators could not exhaust,*still I am
far from wishing to deny that the author of these great poems found a
rich fund of tradition, a well-stocked mythical storehouse, from whence
he might derive both subject and embellishment. But it is one thing to
_use_ existing romances in the embellishment of a poem, another to
patch up the poem itself from such materials. What consistency of style
and execution can be hoped for from such an attempt? or, rather, what
bad taste and tedium will not be the infallible result?

A blending of popular legends, and a free use of the songs of other
bards, are features perfectly consistent with poetical originality. In
fact, the most original writer is still drawing upon outward
impressions*nay, even his own thoughts are a kind of secondary agents
which support and feed the impulses of imagination. But unless there be
some grand pervading principle*some invisible, yet most distinctly
stamped archetypus of the great whole, a poem like the Iliad can never
come to the birth. Traditions the most picturesque, episodes the most
pathetic, local associations teeming with the thoughts of gods and
great men, may crowd in one mighty vision, or reveal themselves in more
substantial forms to the mind of the poet; but, except the power to
create a grand whole, to which these shall be but as details and
embellishments, be present, we shall have nought but a scrap-book, a
parterre filled with flowers and weeds strangling each other in their
wild redundancy; we shall have a cento of rags and tatters, which will
require little acuteness to detect.

Sensible as I am of the difficulty of disproving a negative, and aware
as I must be of the weighty grounds there are for opposing my belief,
it still seems to me that the Homeric question is one that is reserved
for a higher criticism than it has often obtained. We are not by nature
intended to know all things; still less, to compass the powers by which
the greatest blessings of life have been placed at our disposal. Were
faith no virtue, then we might indeed wonder why God willed our
ignorance on any matter. But we are too well taught the contrary
lesson; and it seems as though our faith should be especially tried,
touching the men and the events which have wrought most influence upon
the condition of humanity. And there is a kind of sacredness attached
to the memory of the great and the good, which seems to bid us repulse
the scepticism which would allegorize their existence into a pleasing
apologue, and measure the giants of intellect by an homaeopathic
dynameter.

Long and habitual reading of Homer appears to familiarize our thoughts
even to his incongruities; or rather, if we read in a right spirit and
with a heartfelt appreciation, we are too much dazzled, too deeply
wrapped in admiration of the whole, to dwell upon the minute spots
which mere analysis can discover. In reading an heroic poem, we must
transform ourselves into heroes of the time being, we in imagination
must fight over the same battles, woo the same loves, burn with the
same sense of injury, as an Achilles or a Hector. And if we can but
attain this degree of enthusiasm (and less enthusiasm will scarcely
suffice for the reading of Homer), we shall feel that the poems of
Homer are not only the work of one writer, but of the greatest writer
that ever touched the hearts of men by the power of song.

And it was this supposed unity of authorship which gave these poems
their powerful influence over the minds of the men of old. Heeren, who
is evidently little disposed in favour of modern theories, finely
observes:*

*It was Homer who formed the character of the Greek nation. No poet has
ever, as a poet, exercised a similar influence over his countrymen.
Prophets, lawgivers, and sages have formed the character of other
nations; it was reserved to a poet to form that of the Greeks. This is
a feature in their character which was not wholly erased even in the
period of their degeneracy. When lawgivers and sages appeared in
Greece, the work of the poet had already been accomplished; and they
paid homage to his superior genius. He held up before his nation the
mirror in which they were to behold the world of gods and heroes, no
less than of feeble mortals, and to behold them reflected with purity
and truth. His poems are founded on the first feeling of human nature;
on the love of children, wife, and country; on that passion which
outweighs all others, the love of glory. His songs were poured forth
from a breast which sympathized with all the feelings of man; and
therefore they enter, and will continue to enter, every breast which
cherishes the same sympathies. If it is granted to his immortal spirit,
from another heaven than any of which he dreamed on earth, to look down
on his race, to see the nations from the fields of Asia, to the forests
of Hercynia, performing pilgrimages to the fountain which his magic
wand caused to flow; if it is permitted to him to view the vast
assemblage of grand, of elevated, of glorious productions, which had
been called into being by means of his songs; wherever his immortal
spirit may reside, this alone would suffice to complete his happiness.*

Can we contemplate that ancient monument, on which the *Apotheosis of
Homer* is depictured, and not feel how much of pleasing association,
how much that appeals most forcibly and most distinctly to our minds,
is lost by the admittance of any theory but our old tradition? The more
we read, and the more we think*think as becomes the readers of
Homer,*the more rooted becomes the conviction that the Father of Poetry
gave us this rich inheritance, whole and entire. Whatever were the
means of its preservation, let us rather be thankful for the treasury
of taste and eloquence thus laid open to our use, than seek to make it
a mere centre around which to drive a series of theories, whose
wildness is only equalled by their inconsistency with each other.

As the hymns, and some other poems usually ascribed to Homer, are not
included in Pope*s translation, I will content myself with a brief
account of the Battle of the Frogs and Mice, from the pen of a writer
who has done it full justice:*

*This poem,* says Coleridge, *is a short mock-heroic of ancient date.
The text varies in different editions, and is obviously disturbed and
corrupt to a great degree; it is commonly said to have been a juvenile
essay of Homer*s genius; others have attributed it to the same Pigrees
mentioned above, and whose reputation for humour seems to have invited
the appropriation of any piece of ancient wit, the author of which was
uncertain; so little did the Greeks, before the age of the Ptolemies,
know or care about that department of criticism employed in determining
the genuineness of ancient writings. As to this little poem being a
youthful prolusion of Homer, it seems sufficient to say that from the
beginning to the end, it is a plain and palpable parody, not only of
the general spirit, but of numerous passages of the Iliad itself; and,
even if no such intention to parody were discernible in it, the
objection would still remain, that to suppose a work of mere burlesque
to be the primary effort of poetry in a simple age, seems to reverse
that order in the development of national taste, which the history of
every other people in Europe, and of many in Asia, has almost
ascertained to be a law of the human mind; it is in a state of society
much more refined and permanent than that described in the Iliad, that
any popularity would attend such a ridicule of war and the gods as is
contained in this poem; and the fact of there having existed three
other poems of the same kind attributed, for aught we can see, with as
much reason to Homer, is a strong inducement to believe that none of
them were of the Homeric age. Knight infers from the usage of the word
******, *writing tablet,* instead of *******, *skin,* which, according
to Herod 5, 58, was the material employed by the Asiatic Greeks for
that purpose, that this poem was another offspring of Attic ingenuity;
and generally that the familiar mention of the cock (v. 191) is a
strong argument against so ancient a date for its composition.*

Having thus given a brief account of the poems comprised in Pope*s
design, I will now proceed to make a few remarks on his translation,
and on my own purpose in the present edition.

Pope was not a Grecian. His whole education had been irregular, and his
earliest acquaintance with the poet was through the version of Ogilby.
It is not too much to say that his whole work bears the impress of a
disposition to be satisfied with the general sense, rather than to dive
deeply into the minute and delicate features of language. Hence his
whole work is to be looked upon rather as an elegant paraphrase than a
translation. There are, to be sure, certain conventional anecdotes,
which prove that Pope consulted various friends, whose classical
attainments were sounder than his own, during the undertaking; but it
is probable that these examinations were the result rather of the
contradictory versions already existing, than of a desire to make a
perfect transcript of the original. And in those days, what is called
literal translation was less cultivated than at present. If something
like the general sense could be decorated with the easy gracefulness of
a practised poet; if the charms of metrical cadence and a pleasing
fluency could be made consistent with a fair interpretation of the
poet*s meaning, his words were less jealously sought for, and those who
could read so good a poem as Pope*s Iliad had fair reason to be
satisfied.

It would be absurd, therefore, to test Pope*s translation by our own
advancing knowledge of the original text. We must be content to look at
it as a most delightful work in itself,*a work which is as much a part
of English literature as Homer himself is of Greek. We must not be torn
from our kindly associations with the old Iliad, that once was our most
cherished companion, or our most looked-for prize, merely because
Buttmann, Loewe, and Liddell have made us so much more accurate as to
************ being an adjective, and not a substantive. Far be it from
us to defend the faults of Pope, especially when we think of Chapman*s
fine, bold, rough old English;*far be it from us to hold up his
translation as what a translation of Homer _might_ be. But we can still
dismiss Pope*s Iliad to the hands of our readers, with the
consciousness that they must have read a very great number of books
before they have read its fellow.

THEODORE ALOIS BUCKLEY.


_Christ Church._




THE ODYSSEY OF HOMER.


BOOK I.


ARGUMENT.
MINERVA*S DESCENT TO ITHACA.


The poem opens within forty eight days of the arrival of Ulysses in his
dominions. He had now remained seven years in the Island of Calypso,
when the gods assembled in council, proposed the method of his
departure from thence and his return to his native country. For this
purpose it is concluded to send Mercury to Calypso, and Pallas
immediately descends to Ithaca. She holds a conference with Telemachus,
in the shape of Mantes, king of Taphians; in which she advises him to
take a journey in quest of his father Ulysses, to Pylos and Sparta,
where Nestor and Menelaus yet reigned; then, after having visibly
displayed her divinity, disappears. The suitors of Penelope make great
entertainments, and riot in her palace till night. Phemius sings to
them the return of the Grecians, till Penelope puts a stop to the song.
Some words arise between the suitors and Telemachus, who summons the
council to meet the day following.


The man for wisdom*s various arts renown*d,
Long exercised in woes, O Muse! resound;
Who, when his arms had wrought the destined fall
Of sacred Troy, and razed her heaven-built wall,
Wandering from clime to clime, observant stray*d,
Their manners noted, and their states survey*d,
On stormy seas unnumber*d toils he bore,
Safe with his friends to gain his natal shore:
Vain toils! their impious folly dared to prey
On herds devoted to the god of day;
The god vindictive doom*d them never more
(Ah, men unbless*d!) to touch that natal shore.
Oh, snatch some portion of these acts from fate,
Celestial Muse! and to our world relate.

Now at their native realms the Greeks arrived;
All who the wars of ten long years survived;
And *scaped the perils of the gulfy main.
Ulysses, sole of all the victor train,
An exile from his dear paternal coast,
Deplored his absent queen and empire lost.
Calypso in her caves constrain*d his stay,
With sweet, reluctant, amorous delay;
In vain-for now the circling years disclose
The day predestined to reward his woes.
At length his Ithaca is given by fate,
Where yet new labours his arrival wait;
At length their rage the hostile powers restrain,
All but the ruthless monarch of the main.
But now the god, remote, a heavenly guest,
In *thiopia graced the genial feast
(A race divided, whom with sloping rays
The rising and descending sun surveys);
There on the world*s extremest verge revered
With hecatombs and prayer in pomp preferr*d,
Distant he lay: while in the bright abodes
Of high Olympus, Jove convened the gods:
The assembly thus the sire supreme address*d,
AEgysthus* fate revolving in his breast,
Whom young Orestes to the dreary coast
Of Pluto sent, a blood-polluted ghost.

*Perverse mankind! whose wills, created free,
Charge all their woes on absolute degree;
All to the dooming gods their guilt translate,
And follies are miscall*d the crimes of fate.
When to his lust AEgysthus gave the rein,
Did fate, or we, the adulterous act constrain?
Did fate, or we, when great Atrides died,
Urge the bold traitor to the regicide?
Hermes I sent, while yet his soul remain*d
Sincere from royal blood, and faith profaned;
To warn the wretch, that young Orestes, grown
To manly years, should re-assert the throne.
Yet, impotent of mind, and uncontroll*d,
He plunged into the gulf which Heaven foretold.*

Here paused the god; and pensive thus replies
Minerva, graceful with her azure eyes:

*O thou! from whom the whole creation springs,
The source of power on earth derived to kings!
His death was equal to the direful deed;
So may the man of blood be doomed to bleed!
But grief and rage alternate wound my breast
For brave Ulysses, still by fate oppress*d.
Amidst an isle, around whose rocky shore
The forests murmur, and the surges roar,
The blameless hero from his wish*d-for home
A goddess guards in her enchanted dome;
(Atlas her sire, to whose far-piercing eye
The wonders of the deep expanded lie;
The eternal columns which on earth he rears
End in the starry vault, and prop the spheres).
By his fair daughter is the chief confined,
Who soothes to dear delight his anxious mind;
Successless all her soft caresses prove,
To banish from his breast his country*s love;
To see the smoke from his loved palace rise,
While the dear isle in distant prospect lies,
With what contentment could he close his eyes!
And will Omnipotence neglect to save
The suffering virtue of the wise and brave?
Must he, whose altars on the Phrygian shore
With frequent rites, and pure, avow*d thy power,
Be doom*d the worst of human ills to prove,
Unbless*d, abandon*d to the wrath of Jove?*

*Daughter! what words have pass*d thy lips unweigh*d!
(Replied the Thunderer to the martial maid;)
Deem not unjustly by my doom oppress*d,
Of human race the wisest and the best.
Neptune, by prayer repentant rarely won,
Afflicts the chief, to avenge his giant son,
Whose visual orb Ulysses robb*d of light;
Great Polypheme, of more than mortal might?
Him young Thousa bore (the bright increase
Of Phorcys, dreaded in the sounds and seas);
Whom Neptune eyed with bloom of beauty bless*d,
And in his cave the yielding nymph compress*d
For this the god constrains the Greek to roam,
A hopeless exile from his native home,
From death alone exempt*but cease to mourn;
Let all combine to achieve his wish*d return;
Neptune atoned, his wrath shall now refrain,
Or thwart the synod of the gods in vain.*

*Father and king adored!* Minerva cried,
*Since all who in the Olympian bower reside
Now make the wandering Greek their public care,
Let Hermes to the Atlantic isle repair;
Bid him, arrived in bright Calypso*s court,
The sanction of the assembled powers report:
That wise Ulysses to his native land
Must speed, obedient to their high command.
Meantime Telemachus, the blooming heir
Of sea-girt Ithaca, demands my care;
*Tis mine to form his green, unpractised years
In sage debates; surrounded with his peers,
To save the state, and timely to restrain
The bold intrusion of the suitor-train;
Who crowd his palace, and with lawless power
His herds and flocks in feastful rites devour.
To distant Sparta, and the spacious waste
Of Sandy Pyle, the royal youth shall haste.
There, warm with filial love, the cause inquire
That from his realm retards his god-like sire;
Delivering early to the voice of fame
The promise of a green immortal name.*

She said: the sandals of celestial mould,
Fledged with ambrosial plumes, and rich with gold,
Surround her feet: with these sublime she sails
The a*rial space, and mounts the winged gales;
O*er earth and ocean wide prepared to soar,
Her dreaded arm a beamy javelin bore,
Ponderous and vast: which, when her fury burns,
Proud tyrants humbles, and whole hosts o*erturns.
From high Olympus prone her flight she bends,
And in the realms of Ithaca descends,
Her lineaments divine, the grave disguise
Of Mentes* form conceal*d from human eyes
(Mentes, the monarch of the Taphian land);
A glittering spear waved awful in her hand.
There in the portal placed, the heaven-born maid
Enormous riot and misrule survey*d.
On hides of beeves, before the palace gate
(Sad spoils of luxury), the suitors sate.
With rival art, and ardour in their mien,
At chess they vie, to captivate the queen;
Divining of their loves. Attending nigh,
A menial train the flowing bowl supply.
Others, apart, the spacious hall prepare,
And form the costly feast with busy care.
There young Telemachus, his bloomy face
Glowing celestial sweet, with godlike grace
Amid the circle shines: but hope and fear
(Painful vicissitude!) his bosom tear.
Now, imaged in his mind, he sees restored
In peace and joy the people*s rightful lord;
The proud oppressors fly the vengeful sword.
While his fond soul these fancied triumphs swell*d,
The stranger guest the royal youth beheld;
Grieved that a visitant so long should wait
Unmark*d, unhonour*d, at a monarch*s gate;
Instant he flew with hospitable haste,
And the new friend with courteous air embraced.
*Stranger, whoe*er thou art, securely rest,
Affianced in my faith, a ready guest;
Approach the dome, the social banquet share,
And then the purpose of thy soul declare.*

Thus affable and mild, the prince precedes,
And to the dome the unknown celestial leads.
The spear receiving from the hand, he placed
Against a column, fair with sculpture graced;
Where seemly ranged in peaceful order stood
Ulysses* arms now long disused to blood.
He led the goddess to the sovereign seat,
Her feet supported with a stool of state
(A purple carpet spread the pavement wide);
Then drew his seat, familiar, to her side;
Far from the suitor-train, a brutal crowd,
With insolence, and wine, elate and loud:
Where the free guest, unnoted, might relate,
If haply conscious, of his father*s fate.
The golden ewer a maid obsequious brings,
Replenish*d from the cool, translucent springs;
With copious water the bright vase supplies
A silver laver of capacious size;
They wash. The tables in fair order spread,
They heap the glittering canisters with bread:
Viands of various kinds allure the taste,
Of choicest sort and savour, rich repast!
Delicious wines the attending herald brought;
The gold gave lustre to the purple draught.
Lured with the vapour of the fragrant feast,
In rush*d the suitors with voracious haste;
Marshall*d in order due, to each a sewer
Presents, to bathe his hands, a radiant ewer.
Luxurious then they feast. Observant round
Gay stripling youths the brimming goblets crown*d.
The rage of hunger quell*d, they all advance
And form to measured airs the mazy dance;
To Phemius was consign*d the chorded lyre,
Whose hand reluctant touch*d the warbling wire;
Phemius, whose voice divine could sweetest sing
High strains responsive to the vocal string.

Meanwhile, in whispers to his heavenly guest
His indignation thus the prince express*d:

*Indulge my rising grief, whilst these (my friend)
With song and dance the pompous revel end.
Light is the dance, and doubly sweet the lays,
When for the dear delight another pays.
His treasured stores those cormarants consume,
Whose bones, defrauded of a regal tomb
And common turf, lie naked on the plain,
Or doom*d to welter in the whelming main.
Should he return, that troop so blithe and bold,
With purple robes inwrought, and stiff with gold,
Precipitant in fear would wing their flight,
And curse their cumbrous pride*s unwieldy weight.
But ah, I dream!-the appointed hour is fled.
And hope, too long with vain delusion fed,
Deaf to the rumour of fallacious fame,
Gives to the roll of death his glorious name!
With venial freedom let me now demand
Thy name, thy lineage, and paternal land;
Sincere from whence began thy course, recite,
And to what ship I owe the friendly freight?
Now first to me this visit dost thou deign,
Or number*d in my father*s social train?
All who deserved his choice he made his own,
And, curious much to know, he far was known.*

*My birth I boast (the blue-eyed virgin cries)
From great Anchialus, renown*d and wise;
Mentes my name; I rule the Taphian race,
Whose bounds the deep circumfluent waves embrace;
A duteous people, and industrious isle,
To naval arts inured, and stormy toil.
Freighted with iron from my native land,
I steer my voyage to the Brutian strand
To gain by commerce, for the labour*d mass,
A just proportion of refulgent brass.
Far from your capital my ship resides
At Reitorus, and secure at anchor rides;
Where waving groves on airy Neign grow,
Supremely tall and shade the deeps below.
Thence to revisit your imperial dome,
An old hereditary guest I come;
Your father*s friend. Laertes can relate
Our faith unspotted, and its early date;
Who, press*d with heart-corroding grief and years,
To the gay court a rural shed prefers,
Where, sole of all his train, a matron sage
Supports with homely fond his drooping age,
With feeble steps from marshalling his vines
Returning sad, when toilsome day declines.

*With friendly speed, induced by erring fame,
To hail Ulysses* safe return I came;
But still the frown of some celestial power
With envious joy retards the blissful hour.
Let not your soul be sunk in sad despair;
He lives, he breathes this heavenly vital air,
Among a savage race, whose shelfy bounds
With ceaseless roar the foaming deep surrounds.
The thoughts which roll within my ravish*d breast,
To me, no seer, the inspiring gods suggest;
Nor skill*d nor studious, with prophetic eye
To judge the winged omens of the sky.
Yet hear this certain speech, nor deem it vain;
Though adamantine bonds the chief restrain,
The dire restraint his wisdom will defeat,
And soon restore him to his regal seat.
But generous youth! sincere and free declare,
Are you, of manly growth, his royal heir?
For sure Ulysses in your look appears,
The same his features, if the same his years.
Such was that face, on which I dwelt with joy
Ere Greece assembled stemm*d the tides to Troy;
But, parting then for that detested shore,
Our eyes, unhappy never greeted more.*

*To prove a genuine birth (the prince replies)
On female truth assenting faith relies.
Thus manifest of right, I build my claim
Sure-founded on a fair maternal fame,
Ulysses* son: but happier he, whom fate
Hath placed beneath the storms which toss the great!
Happier the son, whose hoary sire is bless*d
With humble affluence, and domestic rest!
Happier than I, to future empire born,
But doom*d a father*s wretch*d fate to mourn!*

To whom, with aspect mild, the guest divine:
*Oh true descendant of a sceptred line!
The gods a glorious fate from anguish free
To chaste Penelope*s increase decree.
But say, yon jovial troops so gaily dress*d,
Is this a bridal or a friendly feast?
Or from their deed I rightlier may divine,
Unseemly flown with insolence and wine?
Unwelcome revellers, whose lawless joy
Pains the sage ear, and hurts the sober eye.*

*Magnificence of old (the prince replied)
Beneath our roof with virtue could reside;
Unblamed abundance crowned the royal board,
What time this dome revered her prudent lord;
Who now (so Heaven decrees) is doom*d to mourn,
Bitter constraint, erroneous and forlorn.
Better the chief, on Ilion*s hostile plain,
Had fall*n surrounded with his warlike train;
Or safe return*d, the race of glory pass*d,
New to his friends* embrace, and breathed his last!
Then grateful Greece with streaming eyes would raise,
Historic marbles to record his praise;
His praise, eternal on the faithful stone,
Had with transmissive honour graced his son.
Now snatch*d by harpies to the dreary coast.
Sunk is the hero, and his glory lost;
Vanish*d at once! unheard of, and unknown!
And I his heir in misery alone.
Nor for a dear lost father only flow
The filial tears, but woe succeeds to woe
To tempt the spouseless queen with amorous wiles
Resort the nobles from the neighbouring isles;
From Samos, circled with the Ionian main,
Dulichium, and Zacynthas* sylvan reign;
Ev*n with presumptuous hope her bed to ascend,
The lords of Ithaca their right pretend.
She seems attentive to their pleaded vows,
Her heart detesting what her ear allows.
They, vain expectants of the bridal hour,
My stores in riotous expense devour.
In feast and dance the mirthful months employ,
And meditate my doom to crown their joy.*

With tender pity touch*d, the goddess cried:
*Soon may kind Heaven a sure relief provide,
Soon may your sire discharge the vengeance due,
And all your wrongs the proud oppressors rue!
Oh! in that portal should the chief appear,
Each hand tremendous with a brazen spear,
In radiant panoply his limbs incased
(For so of old my father*s court he graced,
When social mirth unbent his serious soul,
O*er the full banquet, and the sprightly bowl);
He then from Ephyre, the fair domain
Of Ilus, sprung from Jason*s royal strain,
Measured a length of seas, a toilsome length, in vain.
For, voyaging to learn the direful art
To taint with deadly drugs the barbed dart;
Observant of the gods, and sternly just,
Ilus refused to impart the baneful trust;
With friendlier zeal my father*s soul was fired,
The drugs he knew, and gave the boon desired.
Appear*d he now with such heroic port,
As then conspicuous at the Taphian court;
Soon should yon boasters cease their haughty strife,
Or each atone his guilty love with life.
But of his wish*d return the care resign,
Be future vengeance to the powers divine.
My sentence hear: with stern distaste avow*d,
To their own districts drive the suitor-crowd;
When next the morning warms the purple east,
Convoke the peerage, and the gods attest;
The sorrows of your inmost soul relate;
And form sure plans to save the sinking state.
Should second love a pleasing flame inspire,
And the chaste queen connubial rights require;
Dismiss*d with honour, let her hence repair
To great Icarius, whose paternal care
Will guide her passion, and reward her choice
With wealthy dower, and bridal gifts of price.
Then let this dictate of my love prevail:
Instant, to foreign realms prepare to sail,
To learn your father*s fortunes; Fame may prove,
Or omen*d voice (the messenger of Jove),
Propitious to the search. Direct your toil
Through the wide ocean first to sandy Pyle;
Of Nestor, hoary sage, his doom demand:
Thence speed your voyage to the Spartan strand;
For young Atrides to the Achaian coast
Arrived the last of all the victor host.
If yet Ulysses views the light, forbear,
Till the fleet hours restore the circling year.
But if his soul hath wing*d the destined flight,
Inhabitant of deep disastrous night;
Homeward with pious speed repass the main,
To the pale shade funereal rites ordain,
Plant the fair column o*er the vacant grave,
A hero*s honours let the hero have.
With decent grief the royal dead deplored,
For the chaste queen select an equal lord.
Then let revenge your daring mind employ,
By fraud or force the suitor train destroy,
And starting into manhood, scorn the boy.
Hast thou not heard how young Orestes, fired
With great revenge, immortal praise acquired?
His virgin-sword AEgysthus* veins imbrued;
The murderer fell, and blood atoned for blood.
O greatly bless*d with every blooming grace!
With equal steps the paths of glory trace;
Join to that royal youth*s your rival name,
And shine eternal in the sphere of fame.
But my associates now my stay deplore,
Impatient on the hoarse-resounding shore.
Thou, heedful of advice, secure proceed;
My praise the precept is, be thine the deed.

*The counsel of my friend (the youth rejoin*d)
Imprints conviction on my grateful mind.
So fathers speak (persuasive speech and mild)
Their sage experience to the favourite child.
But, since to part, for sweet refection due,
The genial viands let my train renew;
And the rich pledge of plighted faith receive,
Worthy the heir of Ithaca to give.*

*Defer the promised boon (the goddess cries,
Celestial azure brightening in her eyes),
And let me now regain the Reithrian port;
From Temese return*d, your royal court
I shall revisit, and that pledge receive;
And gifts, memorial of our friendship, leave.*

Abrupt, with eagle-speed she cut the sky;
Instant invisible to mortal eye.
Then first he recognized the ethereal guest;
Wonder and joy alternate fire his breast;
Heroic thoughts, infused, his heart dilate;
Revolving much his father*s doubtful fate.
At length, composed, he join*d the suitor-throng;
Hush*d in attention to the warbled song.
His tender theme the charming lyrist chose.
Minerva*s anger, and the dreadful woes
Which voyaging from Troy the victors bore,
While storms vindictive intercept the store.
The shrilling airs the vaulted roof rebounds,
Reflecting to the queen the silver sounds.
With grief renew*d the weeping fair descends;
Their sovereign*s step a virgin train attends:
A veil, of richest texture wrought, she wears,
And silent to the joyous hall repairs.
There from the portal, with her mild command,
Thus gently checks the minstrel*s tuneful hand:

*Phemius! let acts of gods, and heroes old,
What ancient bards in hall and bower have told,
Attemper*d to the lyre, your voice employ;
Such the pleased ear will drink with silent joy.
But, oh! forbear that dear disastrous name,
To sorrow sacred, and secure of fame;
My bleeding bosom sickens at the sound,
And every piercing note inflicts a wound.*

*Why, dearest object of my duteous love,
(Replied the prince,) will you the bard reprove?
Oft, Jove*s ethereal rays (resistless fire)
The chanter*s soul and raptured song inspire
Instinct divine? nor blame severe his choice,
Warbling the Grecian woes with heart and voice;
For novel lays attract our ravish*d ears;
But old, the mind with inattention hears:
Patient permit the sadly pleasing strain;
Familiar now with grief, your tears refrain,
And in the public woe forget your own;
You weep not for a perish*d lord alone.
What Greeks new wandering in the Stygian gloom,
Wish your Ulysses shared an equal doom!
Your widow*d hours, apart, with female toil
And various labours of the loom beguile;
There rule, from palace-cares remote and free;
That care to man belongs, and most to me.*

Mature beyond his years, the queen admires
His sage reply, and with her train retires.
Then swelling sorrows burst their former bounds,
With echoing grief afresh the dome resounds;
Till Pallas, piteous of her plaintive cries,
In slumber closed her silver-streaming eyes.

Meantime, rekindled at the royal charms,
Tumultuous love each beating bosom warms;
Intemperate rage a wordy war began;
But bold Telemachus assumed the man.
*Instant (he cried) your female discord end,
Ye deedless boasters! and the song attend;
Obey that sweet compulsion, nor profane
With dissonance the smooth melodious strain.
Pacific now prolong the jovial feast;
But when the dawn reveals the rosy east,
I, to the peers assembled, shall propose
The firm resolve, I here in few disclose;
No longer live the cankers of my court;
All to your several states with speed resort;
Waste in wild riot what your land allows,
There ply the early feast, and late carouse.
But if, to honour lost, *tis still decreed
For you my bowl shall flow, my flock shall bleed;
Judge and revenge my right, impartial Jove!
By him and all the immortal thrones above
(A sacred oath), each proud oppressor slain,
Shall with inglorious gore this marble stain.*

Awed by the prince, thus haughty, bold, and young,
Rage gnaw*d the lip, and wonder chain*d the tongue.
Silence at length the gay Antinous broke,
Constrain*d a smile, and thus ambiguous spoke:
*What god to your untutor*d youth affords
This headlong torrent of amazing words?
May Jove delay thy reign, and cumber late
So bright a genius with the toils of state!*

*Those toils (Telemachus serene replies)
Have charms, with all their weight, t*allure the wise.
Fast by the throne obsequious fame resides,
And wealth incessant rolls her golden tides.
Nor let Antinous rage, if strong desire
Of wealth and fame a youthful bosom fire:
Elect by Jove, his delegate of sway,
With joyous pride the summons I*d obey.
Whene*er Ulysses roams the realm of night,
Should factious power dispute my lineal right,
Some other Greeks a fairer claim may plead;
To your pretence their title would precede.
At least, the sceptre lost, I still should reign
Sole o*er my vassals, and domestic train.*

To this Eurymachus: *To Heaven alone
Refer the choice to fill the vacant throne.
Your patrimonial stores in peace possess;
Undoubted, all your filial claim confess:
Your private right should impious power invade,
The peers of Ithaca would arm in aid.
But say, that stranger guest who late withdrew,
What and from whence? his name and lineage shew.
His grave demeanour and majestic grace
Speak him descended of no vulgar race:
Did he some loan of ancient right require,
Or came forerunner of your sceptr*d sire?*

*Oh son of Polybus!* the prince replies,
*No more my sire will glad these longing eyes;
The queen*s fond hope inventive rumour cheers,
Or vain diviners* dreams divert her fears.
That stranger-guest the Taphian realm obeys,
A realm defended with encircling seas.
Mentes, an ever-honour*d name, of old
High in Ulysses* social list enroll*d.*

Thus he, though conscious of the ethereal guest,
Answer*d evasive of the sly request.
Meantime the lyre rejoins the sprightly lay;
Love-dittied airs, and dance, conclude the day
But when the star of eve with golden light
Adorn*d the matron brow of sable night,
The mirthful train dispersing quit the court,
And to their several domes to rest resort.
A towering structure to the palace join*d;
To this his steps the thoughtful prince inclined:
In his pavilion there, to sleep repairs;
The lighted torch, the sage Euryclea bears
(Daughter of Ops, the just Pisenor*s son,
For twenty beeves by great Laertes won;
In rosy prime with charms attractive graced,
Honour*d by him, a gentle lord and chaste,
With dear esteem: too wise, with jealous strife
To taint the joys of sweet connubial life.
Sole with Telemachus her service ends,
A child she nursed him, and a man attends).
Whilst to his couch himself the prince address*d,
The duteous dame received the purple vest;
The purple vest with decent care disposed,
The silver ring she pull*d, the door reclosed,
The bolt, obedient to the silken cord,
To the strong staple*s inmost depth restored,
Secured the valves. There, wrapped in silent shade,
Pensive, the rules the goddess gave he weigh*d;
Stretch*d on the downy fleece, no rest he knows,
And in his raptured soul the vision glows.




BOOK II.


ARGUMENT.
THE COUNCIL OF ITHACA.


Telemachus in the assembly of the lords of Ithaca complains of the
injustice done him by the suitors, and insists upon their departure
from his palace; appealing to the princes, and exciting the people to
declare against them. The suitors endeavour to justify their stay, at
least till he shall send the queen to the court of Icarius her father;
which he refuses. There appears a prodigy of two eagles in the sky,
which an augur expounds to the ruin of the suitors. Telemachus then
demands a vessel to carry him to Pylos and Sparta, there to inquire of
his father*s fortunes. Pallas, in the shape of Mentor (an ancient
friend of Ulysses), helps him to a ship, assists him in preparing
necessaries for the voyage, and embarks with him that night; which
concludes the second day from the opening of the poem. The scene
continues in the palace of Ulysses, in Ithaca.


Now reddening from the dawn, the morning ray
Glow*d in the front of heaven, and gave the day
The youthful hero, with returning light,
Rose anxious from the inquietudes of night.
A royal robe he wore with graceful pride,
A two-edged falchion threaten*d by his side,
Embroider*d sandals glitter*d as he trod,
And forth he moved, majestic as a god.
Then by his heralds, restless of delay,
To council calls the peers: the peers obey.
Soon as in solemn form the assembly sate,
From his high dome himself descends in state.
Bright in his hand a ponderous javelin shined;
Two dogs, a faithful guard, attend behind;
Pallas with grace divine his form improves,
And gazing crowds admire him as he moves,

His father*s throne he fill*d; while distant stood
The hoary peers, and aged wisdom bow*d.

*Twas silence all. At last AEgyptius spoke;
AEgyptius, by his age and sorrow broke;
A length of days his soul with prudence crown*d,
A length of days had bent him to the ground.
His eldest hope in arms to Ilion came,
By great Ulysses taught the path to fame;
But (hapless youth) the hideous Cyclops tore
His quivering limbs, and quaff*d his spouting gore.
Three sons remain*d; to climb with haughty fires
The royal bed, Eurynomus aspires;
The rest with duteous love his griefs assuage,
And ease the sire of half the cares of age.
Yet still his Antiphus he loves, he mourns,
And, as he stood, he spoke and wept by turns,

*Since great Ulysses sought the Phrygian plains,
Within these walls inglorious silence reigns.
Say then, ye peers! by whose commands we meet?
Why here once more in solemn council sit?
Ye young, ye old, the weighty cause disclose:
Arrives some message of invading foes?
Or say, does high necessity of state
Inspire some patriot, and demand debate?
The present synod speaks its author wise;
Assist him, Jove, thou regent of the skies!*

He spoke. Telemachus with transport glows,
Embraced the omen, and majestic rose
(His royal hand the imperial sceptre sway*d);
Then thus, addressing to AEgyptius, said:

*Reverend old man! lo here confess*d he stands
By whom ye meet; my grief your care demands.
No story I unfold of public woes,
Nor bear advices of impending foes:
Peace the blest land, and joys incessant crown:
Of all this happy realm, I grieve alone.
For my lost sire continual sorrows spring,
The great, the good; your father and your king.
Yet more; our house from its foundation bows,
Our foes are powerful, and your sons the foes;
Hither, unwelcome to the queen, they come;
Why seek they not the rich Icarian dome?
If she must wed, from other hands require
The dowry: is Telemachus her sire?
Yet through my court the noise of revel rings,
And waste the wise frugality of kings.
Scarce all my herds their luxury suffice;
Scarce all my wine their midnight hours supplies.
Safe in my youth, in riot still they grow,
Nor in the helpless orphan dread a foe.
But come it will, the time when manhood grants
More powerful advocates than vain complaints.
Approach that hour! insufferable wrong
Cries to the gods, and vengeance sleeps too long.
Rise then, ye peers! with virtuous anger rise;
Your fame revere, but most the avenging skies.
By all the deathless powers that reign above,
By righteous Themis and by thundering Jove
(Themis, who gives to councils, or denies
Success; and humbles, or confirms the wise),
Rise in my aid! suffice the tears that flow
For my lost sire, nor add new woe to woe.
If e*er he bore the sword to strengthen ill,
Or, having power to wrong, betray*d the will,
On me, on me your kindled wrath assuage,
And bid the voice of lawless riot rage.
If ruin to your royal race ye doom,
Be you the spoilers, and our wealth consume.
Then might we hope redress from juster laws,
And raise all Ithaca to aid our cause:
But while your sons commit the unpunish*d wrong,
You make the arm of violence too strong.*

While thus he spoke, with rage and grief he frown*d,
And dash*d the imperial sceptre to the ground.
The big round tear hung trembling in his eye:
The synod grieved, and gave a pitying sigh,
Then silent sate*at length Antinous burns
With haughty rage, and sternly thus returns:

*O insolence of youth! whose tongue affords
Such railing eloquence, and war of words.
Studious thy country*s worthies to defame,
Thy erring voice displays thy mother*s shame.
Elusive of the bridal day, she gives
Fond hopes to all, and all with hopes deceives.
Did not the sun, through heaven*s wide azure roll*d,
For three long years the royal fraud behold?
While she, laborious in delusion, spread
The spacious loom, and mix*d the various thread:
Where as to life the wondrous figures rise,
Thus spoke the inventive queen, with artful sighs:

*Though cold in death Ulysses breathes no more,
Cease yet awhile to urge the bridal hour:
Cease, till to great Laertes I bequeath
A task of grief, his ornaments of death.
Lest when the Fates his royal ashes claim,
The Grecian matrons taint my spotless fame;
When he, whom living mighty realms obey*d,
Shall want in death a shroud to grace his shade.*

*Thus she: at once the generous train complies,
Nor fraud mistrusts in virtue*s fair disguise.
The work she plied; but, studious of delay,
By night reversed the labours of the day.
While thrice the sun his annual journey made,
The conscious lamp the midnight fraud survey*d;
Unheard, unseen, three years her arts prevail;
The fourth her maid unfolds the amazing tale.
We saw, as unperceived we took our stand,
The backward labours of her faithless hand.
Then urged, she perfects her illustrious toils;
A wondrous monument of female wiles!

*But you, O peers! and thou, O prince! give ear
(I speak aloud, that every Greek may hear):
Dismiss the queen; and if her sire approves
Let him espouse her to the peer she loves:
Bid instant to prepare the bridal train,
Nor let a race of princes wait in vain.
Though with a grace divine her soul is blest,
And all Minerva breathes within her breast,
In wondrous arts than woman more renown*d,
And more than woman with deep wisdom crown*d;
Though Tyro nor Mycene match her name,
Not great Alcmena (the proud boasts of fame);
Yet thus by heaven adorn*d, by heaven*s decree
She shines with fatal excellence, to thee:
With thee, the bowl we drain, indulge the feast,
Till righteous heaven reclaim her stubborn breast.
What though from pole to pole resounds her name!
The son*s destruction waits the mother*s fame:
For, till she leaves thy court, it is decreed,
Thy bowl to empty and thy flock to bleed.*

While yet he speaks, Telemachus replies:
*Ev*n nature starts, and what ye ask denies.
Thus, shall I thus repay a mother*s cares,
Who gave me life, and nursed my infant years!
While sad on foreign shores Ulysses treads.
Or glides a ghost with unapparent shades;
How to Icarius in the bridal hour
Shall I, by waste undone, refund the dower?
How from my father should I vengeance dread!
How would my mother curse my hated head!
And while in wrath to vengeful fiends she cries,
How from their hell would vengeful fiends arise!
Abhorr*d by all, accursed my name would grow,
The earth*s disgrace, and human-kind my foe.
If this displease, why urge ye here your stay?
Haste from the court, ye spoilers, haste away:
Waste in wild riot what your land allows,
There ply the early feast, and late carouse.
But if to honour lost, *tis still decreed
For you my bowl shall flow, my flocks shall bleed;
Judge, and assert my right, impartial Jove!
By him, and all the immortal host above
(A sacred oath), if heaven the power supply,
Vengeance I vow, and for your wrongs ye die.*

With that, two eagles from a mountain*s height
By Jove*s command direct their rapid flight;
Swift they descend, with wing to wing conjoin*d,
Stretch their broad plumes, and float upon the wind.
Above the assembled peers they wheel on high,
And clang their wings, and hovering beat the sky;
With ardent eyes the rival train they threat,
And shrieking loud denounce approaching fate.
They cuff, they tear; their cheeks and neck they rend,
And from their plumes huge drops of blood descend;
Then sailing o*er the domes and towers, they fly,
Full toward the east, and mount into the sky.

The wondering rivals gaze, with cares oppress*d,
And chilling horrors freeze in every breast,
Till big with knowledge of approaching woes,
The prince of augurs, Halitherses, rose:
Prescient he view*d the a*rial tracks, and drew
A sure presage from every wing that flew.

*Ye sons (he cried) of Ithaca, give ear;
Hear all! but chiefly you, O rivals! hear.
Destruction sure o*er all your heads impends
Ulysses comes, and death his steps attends.
Nor to the great alone is death decreed;
We and our guilty Ithaca must bleed.
Why cease we then the wrath of heaven to stay?
Be humbled all, and lead, ye great! the way.
For lo my words no fancied woes relate;
I speak from science and the voice of fate.

*When great Ulysses sought the Phrygian shores
To shake with war proud Ilion*s lofty towers,
Deeds then undone my faithful tongue foretold:
Heaven seal*d my words, and you those deeds behold.
I see (I cried) his woes, a countless train;
I see his friends o*erwhelm*d beneath the main;
How twice ten years from shore to shore he roams:
Now twice ten years are past, and now he comes!*

To whom Eurymachus**Fly, dotard fly,
With thy wise dreams, and fables of the sky.
Go prophesy at home, thy sons advise:
Here thou art sage in vain*I better read the skies
Unnumber*d birds glide through the a*rial way;
Vagrants of air, and unforeboding stray.
Cold in the tomb, or in the deeps below,
Ulysses lies; oh wert thou laid as low!
Then would that busy head no broils suggest,
For fire to rage Telemachus* breast,
From him some bribe thy venal tongue requires,
And interest, not the god, thy voice inspires.
His guideless youth, if thy experienced age
Mislead fallacious into idle rage,
Vengeance deserved thy malice shall repress.
And but augment the wrongs thou would*st redress,
Telemachus may bid the queen repair
To great Icarius, whose paternal care
Will guide her passion, and reward her choice
With wealthy dower, and bridal gifts of price.
Till she retires, determined we remain,
And both the prince and augur threat in vain:
His pride of words, and thy wild dream of fate,
Move not the brave, or only move their hate,
Threat on, O prince! elude the bridal day.
Threat on, till all thy stores in waste decay.
True, Greece affords a train of lovely dames,
In wealth and beauty worthy of our flames:
But never from this nobler suit we cease;
For wealth and beauty less than virtue please.*

To whom the youth: *Since then in vain I tell
My numerous woes, in silence let them dwell.
But Heaven, and all the Greeks, have heard my wrongs;
To Heaven, and all the Greeks, redress belongs;
Yet this I ask (nor be it ask*d in vain),
A bark to waft me o*er the rolling main,
The realms of Pyle and Sparta to explore,
And seek my royal sire from shore to shore;
If, or to fame his doubtful fate be known,
Or to be learn*d from oracles alone,
If yet he lives, with patience I forbear,
Till the fleet hours restore the circling year;
But if already wandering in the train
Of empty shades, I measure back the main,
Plant the fair column o*er the mighty dead,
And yield his consort to the nuptial bed.*

He ceased; and while abash*d the peers attend,
Mentor arose, Ulysses* faithful friend:
(When fierce in arms he sought the scenes of war,
*My friend (he cried), my palace be thy care;
Years roll*d on years my godlike sire decay,
Guard thou his age, and his behests obey.*)
Stern as he rose, he cast his eyes around,
That flash*d with rage; and as spoke, he frown*d,

*O never, never more let king be just,
Be mild in power, or faithful to his trust!
Let tyrants govern with an iron rod,
Oppress, destroy, and be the scourge of God;
Since he who like a father held his reign,
So soon forgot, was just and mild in vain!
True, while my friend is grieved, his griefs I share;
Yet now the rivals are my smallest care:
They for the mighty mischiefs they devise,
Ere long shall pay*their forfeit lives the price.
But against you, ye Greeks! ye coward train!
Gods! how my soul is moved with just disdain!
Dumb ye all stand, and not one tongue affords
His injured prince the little aid of words.*

While yet he spoke, Leocritus rejoined:
*O pride of words, and arrogance of mind!
Would*st thou to rise in arms the Greeks advise?
Join all your powers? in arms, ye Greeks, arise!
Yet would your powers in vain our strength oppose.
The valiant few o*ermatch a host of foes.
Should great Ulysses stern appear in arms,
While the bowl circles and the banquet warms;
Though to his breast his spouse with transport flies,
Torn from her breast, that hour, Ulysses dies.
But hence retreating to your domes repair.
To arm the vessel, Mentor! be thy care,
And Halitherses! thine: be each his friend;
Ye loved the father: go, the son attend.
But yet, I trust, the boaster means to stay
Safe in the court, nor tempt the watery way.*

Then, with a rushing sound the assembly bend
Diverse their steps: the rival rout ascend
The royal dome; while sad the prince explores
The neighbouring main, and sorrowing treads the shores.
There, as the waters o*er his hands he shed,
The royal suppliant to Minerva pray*d:

*O goddess! who descending from the skies
Vouchsafed thy presence to my wondering eyes,
By whose commands the raging deeps I trace,
And seek my sire through storms and rolling seas!
Hear from thy heavens above, O warrior maid!
Descend once more, propitious to my aid.
Without thy presence, vain is thy command:
Greece, and the rival train, thy voice withstand.*

Indulgent to his prayer, the goddess took
Sage Mentor*s form, and thus like Mentor spoke:

*O prince, in early youth divinely wise,
Born, the Ulysses of thy age to rise
If to the son the father*s worth descends,
O*er the wide wave success thy ways attends
To tread the walks of death he stood prepared;
And what he greatly thought, he nobly dared.
Were not wise sons descendant of the wise,
And did not heroes from brave heroes rise,
Vain were my hopes: few sons attain the praise
Of their great sires, and most their sires disgrace.
But since thy veins paternal virtue fires,
And all Penelope thy soul inspires,
Go, and succeed: the rivals* aims despise;
For never, never wicked man was wise.
Blind they rejoice, though now, ev*n now they fall;
Death hastes amain: one hour o*erwhelms them all!
And lo, with speed we plough the watery way;
My power shall guard thee, and my hand convey:
The winged vessel studious I prepare,
Through seas and realms companion of thy care.
Thou to the court ascend: and to the shores
(When night advances) bear the naval stores;
Bread, that decaying man with strength supplies,
And generous wine, which thoughtful sorrow flies.
Meanwhile the mariners, by my command,
Shall speed aboard, a valiant chosen band.
Wide o*er the bay, by vessel vessel rides;
The best I choose to waft then o*er the tides.*

She spoke: to his high dome the prince returns,
And, as he moves, with royal anguish mourns.
*Twas riot all, among the lawless train;
Boar bled by boar, and goat by goat lay slain.
Arrived, his hand the gay Antinous press*d,
And thus deriding, with a smile address*d:

*Grieve not, O daring prince! that noble heart;
Ill suits gay youth the stern heroic part.
Indulge the genial hour, unbend thy soul,
Leave thought to age, and drain the flowing bowl.
Studious to ease thy grief, our care provides
The bark, to waft thee o*er the swelling tides.*

*Is this (returns the prince) for mirth a time?
When lawless gluttons riot, mirth*s a crime;
The luscious wines, dishonour*d, lose their taste;
The song is noise, and impious is the feast.
Suffice it to have spent with swift decay
The wealth of kings, and made my youth a prey.
But now the wise instructions of the sage,
And manly thoughts inspired by manly age,
Teach me to seek redress for all my woe,
Here, or in Pyle*in Pyle, or here, your foe.
Deny your vessels, ye deny in vain:
A private voyager I pass the main.
Free breathe the winds, and free the billows flow;
And where on earth I live, I live your foe.*

He spoke and frown*d, nor longer deign*d to stay,
Sternly his hand withdrew, and strode away.

Meantime, o*er all the dome, they quaff, they feast,
Derisive taunts were spread from guest to guest,
And each in jovial mood his mate address*d:

*Tremble ye not, O friends, and coward fly,
Doom*d by the stern Telemachus to die?
To Pyle or Sparta to demand supplies,
Big with revenge, the mighty warrior flies;
Or comes from Ephyre with poisons fraught,
And kills us all in one tremendous draught!*

*Or who can say (his gamesome mate replies)
But, while the danger of the deeps he tries
He, like his sire, may sink deprived of breath,
And punish us unkindly by his death?
What mighty labours would he then create,
To seize his treasures, and divide his state,
The royal palace to the queen convey,
Or him she blesses in the bridal day!*

Meantime the lofty rooms the prince surveys,
Where lay the treasures of the Ithacian race:
Here ruddy brass and gold refulgent blazed;
There polished chests embroider*d vestures graced;
Here jars of oil breathed forth a rich perfume;
There casks of wine in rows adorn*d the dome
(Pure flavorous wine, by gods in bounty given
And worthy to exalt the feasts of heaven).
Untouch*d they stood, till, his long labours o*er,
The great Ulysses reach*d his native shore.
A double strength of bars secured the gates;
Fast by the door the wise Euryclea waits;
Euryclea, who great Ops! thy lineage shared,
And watch*d all night, all day, a faithful guard.

To whom the prince: *O thou whose guardian care
Nursed the most wretched king that breathes the air;
Untouch*d and sacred may these vessels stand,
Till great Ulysses views his native land.
But by thy care twelve urns of wine be fill*d;
Next these in worth, and firm these urns be seal*d;
And twice ten measures of the choicest flour
Prepared, ere yet descends the evening hour.
For when the favouring shades of night arise,
And peaceful slumbers close my mother*s eyes,
Me from our coast shall spreading sails convey,
To seek Ulysses through the watery way.*

While yet he spoke, she fill*d the walls with cries,
And tears ran trickling from her aged eyes.
*O whither, whither flies my son (she cried)
To realms; that rocks and roaring seas divide?
In foreign lands thy father*s days decay*d.
And foreign lands contain the mighty dead.
The watery way ill-fated if thou try,
All, all must perish, and by fraud you die!
Then stay, my, child! storms beat, and rolls the main,
Oh, beat those storms, and roll the seas in vain!*

*Far hence (replied the prince) thy fears be driven:
Heaven calls me forth; these counsels are of Heaven.
But, by the powers that hate the perjured, swear,
To keep my voyage from the royal ear,
Nor uncompell*d the dangerous truth betray,
Till twice six times descends the lamp of day,
Lest the sad tale a mother*s life impair,
And grief destroy what time awhile would spare.*

Thus he. The matron with uplifted eyes
Attests the all-seeing sovereign of the skies.
Then studious she prepares the choicest flour,
The strength of wheat and wines an ample store.
While to the rival train the prince returns,
The martial goddess with impatience burns;
Like thee, Telemachus, in voice and size,
With speed divine from street to street she flies,
She bids the mariners prepared to stand,
When night descends, embodied on the strand.
Then to No*mon swift she runs, she flies,
And asks a bark: the chief a bark supplies.

And now, declining with his sloping wheels,
Down sunk the sun behind the western hills
The goddess shoved the vessel from the shores,
And stow*d within its womb the naval stores,
Full in the openings of the spacious main
It rides; and now descends the sailor-train,

Next, to the court, impatient of delay.
With rapid step the goddess urged her way;
There every eye with slumberous chains she bound,
And dash*d the flowing goblet to the ground.
Drowsy they rose, with heavy fumes oppress*d,
Reel*d from the palace, and retired to rest.
Then thus, in Mentor*s reverend form array*d,
Spoke to Telemachus the martial maid.
*Lo! on the seas, prepared the vessel stands,
The impatient mariner thy speed demands.*
Swift as she spoke, with rapid pace she leads;
The footsteps of the deity he treads.
Swift to the shore they move along the strand;
The ready vessel rides, the sailors ready stand.

He bids them bring their stores; the attending train
Load the tall bark, and launch into the main,
The prince and goddess to the stern ascend;
To the strong stroke at once the rowers bend.
Full from the west she bids fresh breezes blow;
The sable billows foam and roar below.
The chief his orders gives; the obedient band
With due observance wait the chief*s command;
With speed the mast they rear, with speed unbind
The spacious sheet, and stretch it to the wind.
High o*er the roaring waves the spreading sails
Bow the tall mast, and swell before the gales;
The crooked keel the parting surge divides,
And to the stern retreating roll the tides.
And now they ship their oars, and crown with wine
The holy goblet to the powers divine:
Imploring all the gods that reign above,
But chief the blue-eyed progeny of Jove.

Thus all the night they stem the liquid way,
And end their voyage with the morning ray.




BOOK III.


ARGUMENT.
THE INTERVIEW OF TELEMACHUS AND NESTOR.


Telemachus, guided by Pallas in the shape of Mentor, arrives in the
morning at Pylos, where Nestor and his sons are sacrificing on the sea-
shore to Neptune. Telemachus declares the occasion of his coming: and
Nestor relates what passed in their return from Troy, how their fleets
were separated, and he never since heard of Ulysses. They discourse
concerning the death of Agamemnon, the revenge of Orestes, and the
injuries of the suitors. Nestor advises him to go to Sparta, and
inquire further of Menelaus. The sacrifice ending with the night,
Minerva vanishes from them in the form of an eagle: Telemachus is
lodged in the palace. The next morning they sacrifice a bullock to
Minerva; and Telemachus proceeds on his journey to Sparta, attended by
Pisistratus.
    The scene lies on the sea-shore of Pylos.


The sacred sun, above the waters raised,
Through heaven*s eternal brazen portals blazed;
And wide o*er earth diffused his cheering ray,
To gods and men to give the golden day.
Now on the coast of Pyle the vessel falls,
Before old Neleus* venerable walls.
There suppliant to the monarch of the flood,
At nine green theatres the Pylians stood,
Each held five hundred (a deputed train),
At each, nine oxen on the sand lay slain.
They taste the entrails, and the altars load
With smoking thighs, an offering to the god.
Full for the port the Ithacensians stand,
And furl their sails, and issue on the land.
Telemachus already press*d the shore;
Not first, the power of wisdom march*d before,
And ere the sacrificing throng he join*d,
Admonish*d thus his well-attending mind:

*Proceed, my son! this youthful shame expel;
An honest business never blush to tell.
To learn what fates thy wretched sire detain,
We pass*d the wide immeasurable main.
Meet then the senior far renown*d for sense
With reverend awe, but decent confidence:
Urge him with truth to frame his fair replies;
And sure he will; for wisdom never lies.*

*Oh tell me, Mentor! tell me, faithful guide
(The youth with prudent modesty replied),
How shall I meet, or how accost the sage,
Unskill*d in speech, nor yet mature of age?
Awful th*approach, and hard the task appears,
To question wisely men of riper years.*

To whom the martial goddess thus rejoin*d:
*Search, for some thoughts, thy own suggesting mind;
And others, dictated by heavenly power,
Shall rise spontaneous in the needful hour.
For nought unprosperous shall thy ways attend,
Born with good omens, and with heaven thy friend.*

She spoke, and led the way with swiftest speed;
As swift, the youth pursued the way she led;
and join*d the band before the sacred fire,
Where sate, encompass*d with his sons, the sire.
The youth of Pylos, some on pointed wood
Transfix*d the fragments, some prepared the food:
In friendly throngs they gather to embrace
Their unknown guests, and at the banquet place,
Pisistratus was first to grasp their hands,
And spread soft hides upon the yellow sands;
Along the shore the illustrious pair he led,
Where Nestor sate with youthful Thrasymed,
To each a portion of the feast he bore,
And held the golden goblet foaming o*er;
Then first approaching to the elder guest,
The latent goddess in these words address*d:
*Whoe*er thou art, whom fortune brings to keep
These rites of Neptune, monarch of the deep,
Thee first it fits, O stranger! to prepare
The due libation and the solemn prayer;
Then give thy friend to shed the sacred wine;
Though much thy younger, and his years like mine,
He too, I deem, implores the power divine;
For all mankind alike require their grace,
All born to want; a miserable race!*
He spake, and to her hand preferr*d the bowl;
A secret pleasure touch*d Athena*s soul,
To see the preference due to sacred age
Regarded ever by the just and sage.
Of Ocean*s king she then implores the grace.
*O thou! whose arms this ample globe embrace,
Fulfil our wish, and let thy glory shine
On Nestor first, and Nestor*s royal line;
Next grant the Pylian states their just desires,
Pleased with their hecatomb*s ascending fires;
Last, deign Telemachus and me to bless,
And crown our voyage with desired success.*

Thus she: and having paid the rite divine,
Gave to Ulysses* son the rosy wine.
Suppliant he pray*d. And now the victims dress*d
They draw, divide, and celebrate the feast.
The banquet done, the narrative old man,
Thus mild, the pleasing conference began:

*Now gentle guests! the genial banquet o*er,
It fits to ask ye, what your native shore,
And whence your race? on what adventure say,
Thus far you wander through the watery way?
Relate if business, or the thirst of gain,
Engage your journey o*er the pathless main
Where savage pirates seek through seas unknown
The lives of others, venturous of their own.*

Urged by the precepts by the goddess given,
And fill*d with confidence infused from Heaven,
The youth, whom Pallas destined to be wise
And famed among the sons of men, replies:
*Inquir*st thou, father! from what coast we came?
(Oh grace and glory of the Grecian name!)
From where high Ithaca o*erlooks the floods,
Brown with o*er-arching shades and pendent woods
Us to these shores our filial duty draws,
A private sorrow, not a public cause.
My sire I seek, where*er the voice of fame
Has told the glories of his noble name,
The great Ulysses; famed from shore to shore
For valour much, for hardy suffering more.
Long time with thee before proud Ilion*s wall
In arms he fought; with thee beheld her fall.
Of all the chiefs, this hero*s fate alone
Has Jove reserved, unheard of, and unknown;
Whether in fields by hostile fury slain,
Or sunk by tempests in the gulfy main?
Of this to learn, oppress*d with tender fears,
Lo, at thy knee his suppliant son appears.
If or thy certain eye, or curious ear,
Have learnt his fate, the whole dark story clear
And, oh! whate*er Heaven destined to betide,
Let neither flattery soothe, nor pity hide.
Prepared I stand: he was but born to try
The lot of man; to suffer, and to die.
Oh then, if ever through the ten years* war
The wise, the good Ulysses claim*d thy care;
If e*er he join*d thy council, or thy sword,
True in his deed, and constant to his word;
Far as thy mind through backward time can see
Search all thy stores of faithful memory:
*Tis sacred truth I ask, and ask of thee.*

To him experienced Nestor thus rejoin*d:
*O friend! what sorrows dost thou bring to mind!
Shall I the long, laborious scene review,
And open all the wounds of Greece anew?
What toils by sea! where dark in quest of prey
Dauntless we roved; Achilles led the way;
What toils by land! where mix*d in fatal fight
Such numbers fell, such heroes sunk to night;
There Ajax great, Achilles there the brave,
There wise Patroclus, fill an early grave:
There, too, my son*ah, once my best delight
Once swift of foot, and terrible in fight;
In whom stern courage with soft virtue join*d
A faultless body and a blameless mind;
Antilochus*What more can I relate?
How trace the tedious series of our fate?
Not added years on years my task could close,
The long historian of my country*s woes;
Back to thy native islands might*st thou sail,
And leave half-heard the melancholy tale.
Nine painful years on that detested shore;
What stratagems we form*d, what toils we bore!
Still labouring on, till scarce at last we found
Great Jove propitious, and our conquest crown*d.
Far o*er the rest thy mighty father shined,
In wit, in prudence, and in force of mind.
Art thou the son of that illustrious sire?
With joy I grasp thee, and with love admire.
So like your voices, and your words so wise,
Who finds thee younger must consult his eyes.
Thy sire and I were one; nor varied aught
In public sentence, or in private thought;
Alike to council or the assembly came,
With equal souls, and sentiments the same.
But when (by wisdom won) proud Ilion burn*d,
And in their ships the conquering Greeks return*d,
*Twas God*s high will the victors to divide,
And turn the event, confounding human pride;
Some he destroy*d, some scatter*d as the dust
(Not all were prudent, and not all were just).
Then Discord, sent by Pallas from above,
Stern daughter of the great avenger Jove,
The brother-kings inspired with fell debate;
Who call*d to council all the Achaian state,
But call*d untimely (not the sacred rite
Observed, nor heedful of the setting light,
Nor herald sword the session to proclaim),
Sour with debauch, a reeling tribe they came.
To these the cause of meeting they explain,
And Menelaus moves to cross the main;
Not so the king of men: he will*d to stay,
The sacred rites and hecatombs to pay,
And calm Minerva*s wrath. Oh blind to fate!
The gods not lightly change their love, or hate.
With ireful taunts each other they oppose,
Till in loud tumult all the Greeks arose.
Now different counsels every breast divide,
Each burns with rancour to the adverse side;
The unquiet night strange projects entertain*d
(So Jove, that urged us to our fate, ordain*d).
We with the rising morn our ships unmoor*d,
And brought our captives and our stores aboard;
But half the people with respect obey*d
The king of men, and at his bidding stay*d.
Now on the wings of winds our course we keep
(For God had smooth*d the waters of the deep);
For Tenedos we spread our eager oars,
There land, and pay due victims to the powers;
To bless our safe return, we join in prayer;
But angry Jove dispersed our vows in air,
And raised new discord. Then (so Heaven decreed)
Ulysses first and Nestor disagreed!
Wise as he was, by various counsels sway*d,
He there, though late, to please the monarch, stay*d.
But I, determined, stem the foamy floods,
Warn*d of the coming fury of the gods.
With us, Tydides fear*d, and urged his haste:
And Menelaus came, but came the last,
He join*d our vessels in the Lesbian bay,
While yet we doubted of our watery way;
If to the right to urge the pilot*s toil
(The safer road), beside the Psyrian isle;
Or the straight course to rocky Chios plough,
And anchor under Mimas* shaggy brow?
We sought direction of the power divine:
The god propitious gave the guiding sign;
Through the mid seas he bid our navy steer,
And in Euboea shun the woes we fear.
The whistling winds already waked the sky;
Before the whistling winds the vessels fly,
With rapid swiftness cut the liquid way,
And reach Gerestus at the point of day.
There hecatombs of bulls, to Neptune slain,
High-flaming please the monarch of the main.
The fourth day shone, when all their labours o*er,
Tydides* vessels touched the wish*d-for shore.
But I to Pylos scud before the gales,
The god still breathing on my swelling sails;
Separate from all, I safely landed here;
Their fates or fortunes never reach*d my ear.
Yet what I learn*d, attend; as here I sat,
And ask*d each voyager each hero*s fate;
Curious to know, and willing to relate.

*Safe reach*d the Myrmidons their native land,
Beneath Achilles* warlike son*s command.
Those, whom the heir of great Apollo*s art,
Brave Philoctetes, taught to wing the dart;
And those whom Idomen from Ilion*s plain
Had led, securely cross*d the dreadful main
How Agamemnon touch*d his Argive coast,
And how his life by fraud and force he lost,
And how the murderer, paid his forfeit breath;
What lands so distant from that scene of death
But trembling heard the fame? and heard, admire.
How well the son appeased his slaughter*d sire!
Ev*n to the unhappy, that unjustly bleed,
Heaven gives posterity, to avenge the deed.
So fell *gysthus; and mayest thou, my friend,
(On whom the virtues of thy sire descend,)
Make future times thy equal act adore,
And be what brave Orestes was before!*

The prudent youth replied: *O thou the grace
And lasting glory of the Grecian race!
Just was the vengeance, and to latest days
Shall long posterity resound the praise.
Some god this arm with equal prowess bless!
And the proud suitors shall its force confess;
Injurious men! who while my soul is sore
Of fresh affronts, are meditating more.
But Heaven denies this honour to my hand,
Nor shall my father repossess the land;
The father*s fortune never to return,
And the sad son*s to softer and to mourn!*
Thus he; and Nestor took the word: *My son,
Is it then true, as distant rumours run,
That crowds of rivals for thy mother*s charms
Thy palace fill with insults and alarms?
Say, is the fault, through tame submission, thine?
Or leagued against thee, do thy people join,
Moved by some oracle, or voice divine?
And yet who knows, but ripening lies in fate
An hour of vengeance for the afflicted state;
When great Ulysses shall suppress these harms,
Ulysses singly, or all Greece in arms.
But if Athena, war*s triumphant maid,
The happy son will as the father aid,
(Whose fame and safety was her constant care
In every danger and in every war:
Never on man did heavenly favour shine
With rays so strong, distinguish*d and divine,
As those with which Minerva mark*d thy sire)
So might she love thee, so thy soul inspire!
Soon should their hopes in humble dust be laid,
And long oblivion of the bridal bed.*

*Ah! no such hope (the prince with sighs replies)
Can touch my breast; that blessing Heaven denies.
Ev*n by celestial favour were it given,
Fortune or fate would cross the will of Heaven.*

*What words are these, and what imprudence thine?
(Thus interposed the martial maid divine)
Forgetful youth! but know, the Power above
With ease can save each object of his love;
Wide as his will, extends his boundless grace;
Nor lost in time nor circumscribed by place.
Happier his lot, who, many sorrows pass*d,
Long labouring gains his natal shore at last;
Than who, too speedy, hastes to end his life
By some stern ruffian, or adulterous wife.
Death only is the lot which none can miss,
And all is possible to Heaven but this.
The best, the dearest favourite of the sky,
Must taste that cup, for man is born to die.*

Thus check*d, replied Ulysses* prudent heir:
*Mentor, no more*the mournful thought forbear;
For he no more must draw his country*s breath,
Already snatch*d by fate, and the black doom of death!
Pass we to other subjects; and engage
On themes remote the venerable sage
(Who thrice has seen the perishable kind
Of men decay, and through three ages shined
Like gods majestic, and like gods in mind);
For much he knows, and just conclusions draws,
From various precedents, and various laws.
O son of Neleus! awful Nestor, tell
How he, the mighty Agamemnon, fell;
By what strange fraud *gysthus wrought, relate
(By force he could not) such a hero*s fate?
Live Menelaus not in Greece? or where
Was then the martial brother*s pious care?
Condemn*d perhaps some foreign shore to tread;
Or sure *gysthus had not dared the deed.*

To whom the full of days: Illustrious youth,
Attend (though partly thou hast guess*d) the truth.
For had the martial Menelaus found
The ruffian breathing yet on Argive ground;
Nor earth had bid his carcase from the skies,
Nor Grecian virgins shriek*d his obsequies,
But fowls obscene dismember*d his remains,
And dogs had torn him on the naked plains.
While us the works of bloody Mars employ*d,
The wanton youth inglorious peace enjoy*d:
He stretch*d at ease in Argos* calm recess
(Whose stately steeds luxuriant pastures bless),
With flattery*s insinuating art
Soothed the frail queen, and poison*d all her heart.
At first, with worthy shame and decent pride,
The royal dame his lawless suit denied.
For virtue*s image yet possess*d her mind.
Taught by a master of the tuneful kind;
Atrides, parting for the Trojan war,
Consign*d the youthful consort to his care.
True to his charge, the bard preserved her long
In honour*s limits; such the power of song.
But when the gods these objects of their hate
Dragg*d to destruction by the links of fate;
The bard they banish*d from his native soil,
And left all helpless in a desert isle;
There he, the sweetest of the sacred train,
Sung dying to the rocks, but sung in vain.
Then virtue was no more; her guard away,
She fell, to lust a voluntary prey.
Even to the temple stalk*d the adulterous spouse,
With impious thanks, and mockery of the vows,
With images, with garments, and with gold;
And odorous fumes from loaded altars roll*d.

*Meantime from flaming Troy we cut the way
With Menelaus, through the curling sea.
But when to Sunium*s sacred point we came,
Crown*d with the temple of the Athenian dame;
Atride*s pilot, Phrontes, there expired
(Phrontes, of all the songs of men admired
To steer the bounding bark with steady toil,
When the storm thickens, and the billows boil);
While yet he exercised the steerman*s art,
Apollo touch*d him with his gentle dart;
Even with the rudder in his hand, he fell.
To pay whole honours to the shades of hell,
We check*d our haste, by pious office bound,
And laid our old companion in the ground.
And now the rites discharged, our course we keep
Far on the gloomy bosom of the deep:
Soon as Malae*s misty tops arise,
Sudden the Thunderer blackens all the skies,
And the winds whistle, and the surges roll
Mountains on mountains, and obscure the pole.
The tempest scatters, and divides our fleet;
Part, the storm urges on the coast of Crete,
Where winding round the rich Cydonian plain,
The streams of Jardan issue to the main.
There stands a rock, high, eminent and steep,
Whose shaggy brow o*erhangs the shady deep,
And views Gortyna on the western side;
On this rough Auster drove the impetuous tide:
With broken force the billows roll*d away,
And heaved the fleet into the neighb*ring bay.
Thus saved from death, they gain*d the Ph*stan shores,
With shatter*d vessels and disabled oars;
But five tall barks the winds and water toss*d,
Far from their fellows, on the *gyptian coast.
There wander*d Menelaus through foreign shores
Amassing gold, and gathering naval stores;
While cursed *gysthus the detested deed
By fraud fulfilled, and his great brother bled.
Seven years, the traitor rich Mycenae sway*d,
And his stern rule the groaning land obey*d;
The eighth, from Athens to his realm restored,
Orestes brandish*d the avenging sword,
Slew the dire pair, and gave to funeral flame
The vile assassin and adulterous dame.
That day, ere yet the bloody triumphs cease,
Return*d Atrides to the coast of Greece,
And safe to Argos port his navy brought,
With gifts of price and ponderous treasure fraught.
Hence warn*d, my son, beware! nor idly stand
Too long a stranger to thy native land;
Lest heedless absence wear thy wealth away,
While lawless feasters in thy palace away;
Perhaps may seize thy realm, and share the spoil;
And though return, with disappointed toil,
From thy vain journey, to a rifled isle.
However, my friend, indulge one labour more,
And seek Atrides on the Spartan shore.
He, wandering long a wider circle made,
And many-languaged nations has survey*d:
And measured tracks unknown to other ships,
Amid the monstrous wonders of the deeps,
(A length of ocean and unbounded sky.
Which scarce the sea-fowl in a year o*erfly);
Go then; to Sparta take the watery way,
Thy ship and sailors but for orders stay;
Or, if my land then choose thy course to bend,
My steeds, my chariots, and my songs, attend;
Thee to Atrides they shall safe convey,
Guides of thy road, companions of thy way.
Urge him with truth to frame his wise replies,
And sure he will; for Menelaus is wise.*
Thus while he speaks the ruddy sun descends,
And twilight grey her evening shade extends.
Then thus the blue-eyed maid: *O full of days!
Wise are thy words, and just are all thy ways.
Now immolate the tongues, and mix the wine,
Sacred to Neptune and the powers divine,
The lamp of day is quench*d beneath the deep,
And soft approach the balmy hours of sleep;
Nor fits it to prolong the heavenly feast,
Timeless, indecent, but retire to rest.*

So spake Jove*s daughter, the celestial maid,
The sober train attended and obey*d.
The sacred heralds on their hands around
Pour*d the full urns; the youths the goblets crown*d;
From bowl to bowl the homely beverage flows;
While to the final sacrifice they rose.
The tongues they cast upon the fragrant flame,
And pour, above, the consecrated stream.
And now, their thirst by copious draughts allay*d,
The youthful hero and the Athenian maid
Propose departure from the finish*d rite,
And in their hollow bark to pass the night;
But this hospitable sage denied,
*Forbid it, Jove! and all the gods! (he cried),
Thus from my walls and the much-loved son to send
Of such a hero, and of such a friend!
Me, as some needy peasant, would ye leave,
Whom Heaven denies the blessing to relieve?
Me would ye leave, who boast imperial sway,
When beds of royal state invite your stay?
No*long as life this mortal shall inspire,
Or as my children imitate their sire.
Here shall the wandering stranger find his home,
And hospitable rites adorn the dome.*

*Well hast thou spoke (the blue-eyed maid replies),
Beloved old man! benevolent as wise.
Be the kind dictates of thy heart obey*d,
And let thy words Telemachus persuade:
He to thy palace shall thy steps pursue;
I to the ship, to give the orders due,
Prescribe directions and confirm the crew.
For I alone sustain their naval cares,
Who boast experience from these silver hairs;
All youths the rest, whom to this journey move
Like years, like tempers, and their prince*s love
There in the vessel shall I pass the night;
And, soon as morning paints the fields of light,
I go to challenge from the Caucons bold
A debt, contracted in the days of old,
But this, thy guest, received with friendly care
Let thy strong coursers swift to Sparta bear;
Prepare thy chariot at the dawn of day,
And be thy son companion of his way.*

Then, turning with the word, Minerva flies,
And soars an eagle through the liquid skies.
Vision divine! the throng*d spectators gaze
In holy wonder fix*d, and still amaze.
But chief the reverend sage admired; he took
The hand of young Telemachus, and spoke:
*Oh, happy youth! and favoured of the skies,
Distinguished care of guardian deities!
Whose early years for future worth engage,
No vulgar manhood, no ignoble age.
For lo! none other of the course above,
Then she, the daughter of almighty Jove,
Pallas herself, the war-triumphant maid;
Confess*d is thine, as once thy father*s aid.
So guide me, goddess! so propitious shine
On me, my consort, and my royal line!
A yearling bullock to thy name shall smoke,
Untamed, unconscious of the galling yoke,
With ample forehead, and yet tender horns,
Whose budding honours ductile gold adorns.*

Submissive thus the hoary sire preferr*d
His holy vow: the favouring goddess heard.
Then, slowly rising, o*er the sandy space
Precedes the father, follow*d by his race,
(A long procession) timely marching home
In comely order to the regal dome.
There when arrived, on thrones around him placed,
His sons and grandsons the wide circle graced.
To these the hospitable sage, in sign
Of social welcome, mix*d the racy wine
(Late from the mellowing cask restored to light,
By ten long years refined, and rosy bright).
To Pallas high the foaming bowl he crown*d,
And sprinkled large libations on the ground.
Each drinks a full oblivion of his cares,
And to the gifts of balmy sleep repairs.
Deep in a rich alcove the prince was laid,
And slept beneath the pompous colonnade;
Fast by his side Pisistratus was spread
(In age his equal) on a splendid bed:
But in an inner court, securely closed,
The reverend Nestor and his queen reposed.

When now Aurora, daughter of the dawn,
With rosy lustre purpled o*er the lawn,
The old man early rose, walk*d forth, and sate
On polish*d stone before his palace gate;
With unguents smooth the lucid marble shone,
Where ancient Neleus sate, a rustic throne;
But he descending to the infernal shade,
Sage Nestor fill*d it, and the sceptre sway*d.
His sons around him mild obeisance pay,
And duteous take the orders of the day.
First Echephron and Stratius quit their bed;
Then Perseus, Aretus, and Thrasymed;
The last Pisistratus arose from rest:
They came, and near him placed the stranger-guest.
To these the senior thus declared his will:
*My sons! the dictates of your sire fulfil.
To Pallas, first of gods, prepare the feast,
Who graced our rites, a more than mortal guest
Let one, despatchful, bid some swain to lead
A well-fed bullock from the grassy mead;
One seek the harbour where the vessels moor,
And bring thy friends, Telemachus! ashore
(Leave only two the galley to attend);
Another Laerceus must we send,
Artist devine, whose skilful hands infold
The victim*s horn with circumfusile gold.
The rest may here the pious duty share,
And bid the handmaids for the feast prepare,
The seats to range, the fragrant wood to bring,
And limpid waters from the living spring.*

He said, and busy each his care bestow*d;
Already at the gates the bullock low*d,
Already came the Ithacensian crew,
The dexterous smith the tools already drew;
His ponderous hammer and his anvil sound,
And the strong tongs to turn the metal round.
Nor was Minerva absent from the rite,
She view*d her honours, and enjoyed the sight,
With reverend hand the king presents the gold,
Which round the intorted horns the gilder roll*d.
So wrought as Pallas might with pride behold.
Young Aretus from forth his bridal bower
Brought the full laver, o*er their hands to pour,
And canisters of consecrated flour.
Stratius and Echephron the victim led;
The axe was held by warlike Thrasymed,
In act to strike; before him Perseus stood,
The vase extending to receive the blood.
The king himself initiates to the power:
Scatters with quivering hand the sacred flour,
And the stream sprinkles; from the curling brows
The hair collected in the fire he throws.
Soon as due vows on every part were paid,
And sacred wheat upon the victim laid,
Strong Thrasymed discharged the speeding blow
Full on his neck, and cut the nerves in two.
Down sunk the heavy beast; the females round
Maids, wives, and matrons, mix a shrilling sound.
Nor scorned the queen the holy choir to join
(The first born she, of old Clymenus* line:
In youth by Nestor loved, of spotless fame.
And loved in age, Eurydice her name).
From earth they rear him, struggling now with death;
And Nestor*s youngest stops the vents of breath.
The soul for ever flies; on all sides round
Streams the black blood, and smokes upon the ground
The beast they then divide and disunite
The ribs and limbs, observant of the rite:
On these, in double cauls involved with art,
The choicest morsels lay from every part.
The sacred sage before his altar stands,
Turns the burnt offering with his holy hands,
And pours the wine, and bids the flames aspire;
The youth with instruments surround the fire.
The thighs now sacrificed, and entrails dress*d,
The assistants part, transfix, and broil the rest
While these officious tend the rites divine,
The last fair branch of the Nestorean line,
Sweet Polycaste, took the pleasing toil
To bathe the prince, and pour the fragrant oil.
O*er his fair limbs a flowery vest he threw,
And issued, like a god, to mortal view.
His former seat beside the king he found
(His people*s father with his peers around);
All placed at ease the holy banquet join,
And in the dazzling goblet laughs the wine.

The rage of thirst and hunger now suppress*d,
The monarch turns him to his royal guest;
And for the promised journey bids prepare
The smooth hair*d horses, and the rapid car.
Observant of his word, the word scarce spoke,
The sons obey, and join them to the yoke.
Then bread and wine a ready handmaid brings,
And presents, such as suit the state of kings.
The glittering seat Telemachus ascends;
His faithful guide Pisistratus attends;
With hasty hand the ruling reins he drew;
He lash*d the coursers, and the coursers flew.
Beneath the bounding yoke alike they hold
Their equal pace, and smoked along the field.
The towers of Pylos sink, its views decay,
Fields after fields fly back, till close of day;
Then sunk the sun, and darken*d all the way.

To Pherae now, Diocleus* stately seat
(Of Alpheus* race), the weary youths retreat.
His house affords the hospitable rite,
And pleased they sleep (the blessing of the night).
But when Aurora, daughter of the dawn,
With rosy lustre purpled o*er the lawn,
Again they mount, their journey to renew,
And from the sounding portico they flew.
Along the waving fields their way they hold
The fields receding as their chariot roll*d;
Then slowly sunk the ruddy globe of light,
And o*er the shaded landscape rush*d the night.




BOOK IV.


ARGUMENT.
THE CONFERENCE WITH MENELAUS.


Telemachus with Pisistratus arriving at Sparta, is hospitably received
by Menelaus to whom he relates the cause of his coming, and learns from
him many particulars of what befell the Greeks since the destruction of
Troy. He dwells more at large upon the prophecies of Proteus to him in
his return; from which he acquaints Telemachus that Ulysses is detained
in the island of Calypso.
    In the meantime the suitors consult to destroy Telemachus on the
    voyage home. Penelope is apprised of this; but comforted in a dream
    by Pallas, in the shape of her sister Iphthima.


And now proud Sparta with their wheels resounds,
Sparta whose walls a range of hills surrounds;
At the fair dome the rapid labour ends;
Where sate Atrides *midst his bridal friends,
With double vows invoking Hymen*s power,
To bless his son*s and daughter*s nuptial hour.

That day, to great Achilles* son resign*d,
Hermione, the fairest of her kind,
Was sent to crown the long-protracted joy,
Espoused before the final doom of Troy;
With steeds and gilded cars, a gorgeous train
Attend the nymphs to Phthia*s distant reign.
Meanwhile at home, to Megapenthe*s bed
The virgin choir Alector*s daughter led.
Brave Megapenthes from a stolen amour
To great Atrides* age his handmaid bore;
To Helen*s bed the gods alone assign
Hermione, to extend the regal line;
On whom a radiant pomp of Graces wait,
Resembling Venus in attractive state.

While this gay friendly troop the king surround,
With festival and mirth the roofs resound;
A bard amid the joyous circle sings
High airs attemper*d to the vocal strings;
Whilst warbling to the varied strain, advance
Two sprightly youths to form the bounding dance,
*Twas then, that issuing through the palace gate,
The splendid car roll*d slow in regal state:
On the bright eminence young Nestor shone,
And fast beside him great Ulysses* son;
Grave Eteoneus saw the pomp appear,
And speeding, thus address*d the royal ear;

*Two youths approach, whose semblant features prove
Their blood devolving from the source of Jove
Is due reception deign*d, or must they bend
Their doubtful course to seek a distant friend?*

*Insensate! (with a sigh the king replies,)
Too long, misjudging, have I thought thee wise
But sure relentless folly steels thy breast,
Obdurate to reject the stranger-guest;
To those dear hospitable rites a foe,
Which in my wanderings oft relieved my woe;
Fed by the bounty of another*s board,
Till pitying Jove my native realm restored*
Straight be the coursers from the car released,
Conduct the youths to grace the genial feast.*

The seneschal, rebuked, in haste withdrew;
With equal haste a menial train pursue:
Part led the coursers, from the car enlarged,
Each to a crib with choicest grain surcharged;
Part in a portico, profusely graced
With rich magnificence, the chariot placed;
Then to the dome the friendly pair invite,
Who eye the dazzling roofs with vast delight;
Resplendent as the blaze of summer noon,
Or the pale radiance of the midnight moon.
From room to room their eager view they bend
Thence to the bath, a beauteous pile, descend;
Where a bright damsel train attends the guests
With liquid odours, and embroider*d vests.
Refresh*d, they wait them to the bower of state,
Where, circled with his peers, Atrides sate;
Throned next the king, a fair attendant brings
The purest product of the crystal springs;
High on a massy vase of silver mould,
The burnish*d laver flames with solid gold,
In solid gold the purple vintage flows,
And on the board a second banquet rose.
When thus the king, with hospitable port;
*Accept this welcome to the Spartan court:
The waste of nature let the feast repair,
Then your high lineage and your names declare;
Say from what sceptred ancestry ye claim,
Recorded eminent in deathless fame,
For vulgar parents cannot stamp their race
With signatures of such majestic grace.*

Ceasing, benevolent he straight assigns
The royal portion of the choicest chines
To each accepted friend; with grateful haste
They share the honours of the rich repast.
Sufficed, soft whispering thus to Nestor*s son,
His head reclined, young Ithacus begun:

*View*st thou unmoved, O ever-honour*d most!
These prodigies of art, and wondrous cost!
Above, beneath, around the palace shines
The sunless treasure of exhausted mines;
The spoils of elephants the roofs inlay,
And studded amber darts the golden ray;
Such, and not nobler, in the realms above
My wonder dictates is the dome of Jove.*

The monarch took the word, and grave replied:
*Presumptuous are the vaunts, and vain the pride
Of man, who dares in pomp with Jove contest,
Unchanged, immortal, and supremely blest!
With all my affluence, when my woes are weigh*d,
Envy will own the purchase dearly paid.
For eight slow-circling years, by tempests toss*d,
From Cypress to the far Phoenician coast
(Sidon the capital), I stretch*d my toil
Through regions fatten*d with the flows of Nile.
Next Aethiopia*s utmost bound explore,
And the parch*d borders of the Arabian shore;
Then warp my voyage on the southern gales,
O*er the warm Lybian wave to spread my sails;
That happy clime, where each revolving year
The teeming ewes a triple offspring bear;
And two fair crescents of translucent horn
The brows of all their young increase adorn:
The shepherd swains, with sure abundance blest,
On the fat flock and rural dainties feast;
Nor want of herbage makes the dairy fail,
But every season fills the foaming pail.
Whilst, heaping unwash*d wealth, I distant roam,
The best of brothers, at his natal home,
By the dire fury of a traitress wife,
Ends the sad evening of a stormy life;
Whence, with incessant grief my soul annoy*d,
These riches are possess*d, but not enjoy*d!
My wars, the copious theme of every tongue,
To you your fathers have recorded long.
How favouring Heaven repaid my glorious toils
With a sack*d palace, and barbaric spoils.
Oh! had the gods so large a boon denied
And life, the just equivalent supplied
To those brave warriors, who, with glory fired
Far from their country, in my cause expired!
Still in short intervals of pleasing woe.
Regardful of the friendly dues I owe,
I to the glorious dead, for ever dear!
Indulge the tribute of a grateful tear.
But oh! Ulysses*deeper than the rest
That sad idea wounds my anxious breast!
My heart bleeds fresh with agonizing pain;
The bowl and tasteful viands tempt in vain;
Nor sleep*s soft power can close my streaming eyes,
When imaged to my soul his sorrows rise.
No peril in my cause he ceased to prove,
His labours equall*d only by my love:
And both alike to bitter fortune born,
For him to suffer, and for me to mourn!
Whether he wanders on some friendly coast,
Or glides in Stygian gloom a pensive ghost,
No fame reveals; but, doubtful of his doom,
His good old sire with sorrow to the tomb
Declines his trembling steps; untimely care
Withers the blooming vigour of his heir;
And the chaste partner of his bed and throne
Wastes all her widow*d hours in tender moan.*

While thus pathetic to the prince he spoke,
From the brave youth the streaming passion broke;
Studious to veil the grief, in vain repress*d,
His face he shrouded with his purple vest.
The conscious monarch pierced the coy disguise,
And view*d his filial love with vast surprise:
Dubious to press the tender theme, or wait
To hear the youth inquire his father*s fate.
In this suspense bright Helen graced the room;
Before her breathed a gale of rich perfume.
So moves, adorn*d with each attractive grace,
The silver shafted goddess of the chase!
The seat of majesty Adraste brings,
With art illustrious, for the pomp of kings;
To spread the pall (beneath the regal chair)
Of softest wool, is bright Alcippe*s care.
A silver canister, divinely wrought,
In her soft hands the beauteous Phylo brought;
To Sparta*s queen of old the radiant vase
Alcandra gave, a pledge of royal grace;
For Polybus her lord (whose sovereign sway
The wealthy tribes of Pharian Thebes obey),
When to that court Atrides came, caress*d
With vast munificence the imperial guest:
Two lavers from the richest ore refined,
With silver tripods, the kind host assign*d;
And bounteous from the royal treasure told
Ten equal talents of refulgent gold.
Alcandra, consort of his high command,
A golden distaff gave to Helen*s hand;
And that rich vase, with living sculpture wrought,
Which heap*d with wool the beauteous Phylo brought
The silken fleece, impurpled for the loom,
Rivall*d the hyacinth in vernal bloom.
The sovereign seat then Jove born Helen press*d,
And pleasing thus her sceptred lord address*d:

*Who grace our palace now, that friendly pair,
Speak they their lineage, or their names declare?
Uncertain of the truth, yet uncontroll*d,
Hear me the bodings of my breast unfold.
With wonder wrapp*d on yonder check I trace
The feature of the Ulyssean race:
Diffused o*er each resembling line appear,
In just similitude, the grace and air
Of young Telemachus! the lovely boy,
Who bless*d Ulysses with a father*s joy,
What time the Greeks combined their social arms,
To avenge the stain of my ill-fated charms!*

*Just is thy thought, (the king assenting cries,)
Methinks Ulysses strikes my wondering eyes;
Full shines the father in the filial frame,
His port, his features, and his shape the same;
Such quick regards his sparkling eyes bestow;
Such wavy ringlets o*er his shoulders flow
And when he heard the long disastrous store
Of cares, which in my cause Ulysses bore;
Dismay*d, heart-wounded with paternal woes,
Above restraint the tide of sorrow rose;
Cautious to let the gushing grief appear,
His purple garment veil*d the falling tear.*

*See there confess*d (Pisistratus replies)
The genuine worth of Ithacus the wise!
Of that heroic sire the youth is sprung,
But modest awe hath chain*d his timorous tongue.
Thy voice, O king! with pleased attention heard,
Is like the dictates of a god revered.
With him, at Nestor*s high command, I came,
Whose age I honour with a parent*s name.
By adverse destiny constrained to sue
For counsel and redress, he sues to you
Whatever ill the friendless orphan bears,
Bereaved of parents in his infant years,
Still must the wrong*d Telemachus sustain,
If, hopeful of your aid, he hopes in vain;
Affianced in your friendly power alone,
The youth would vindicate the vacant throne.*

*Is Sparta blest, and these desiring eyes
View my friend*s son? (the king exalting cries;)
Son of my friend, by glorious toils approved,
Whose sword was sacred to the man he loved;
Mirror of constant faith, revered and mourn*d*
When Troy was ruin*d, had the chief return*d,
No Greek an equal space had ere possess*d,
Of dear affection, in my grateful breast.
I, to confirm the mutual joys we shared,
For his abode a capital prepared;
Argos, the seat of sovereign rule, I chose;
Fair in the plan the future palace rose,
Where my Ulysses and his race might reign,
And portion to his tribes the wide domain,
To them my vassals had resign*d a soil,
With teeming plenty to reward their toil.
There with commutual zeal we both had strove
In acts of dear benevolence and love:
Brothers in peace, not rivals in command,
And death alone dissolved the friendly band!
Some envious power the blissful scene destroys;
Vanish*d are all the visionary joys;
The soul of friendship to my hope is lost,
Fated to wander from his natal coast!*

He ceased; a gush of grief began to rise:
Fast streams a tide from beauteous Helen*s eyes;
Fast for the sire the filial sorrows flow;
The weeping monarch swells the mighty woe;
Thy cheeks, Pisistratus, the tears bedew,
While pictured so thy mind appear*d in view,
Thy martial brother; on the Phrygian plain
Extended pale, by swarthy Memnon slain!
But silence soon the son of Nestor broke,
And melting with fraternal pity, spoke:

*Frequent, O king, was Nestor wont to raise
And charm attention with thy copious praise;
To crowd thy various gifts, the sage assign*d
The glory of a firm capacious mind;
With that superior attribute control
This unavailing impotence of soul,
Let not your roof with echoing grief resound,
Now for the feast the friendly bowl is crown*d;
But when, from dewy shade emerging bright,
Aurora streaks the sky with orient light,
Let each deplore his dead; the rites of woe
Are all, alas! the living can bestow;
O*er the congenial dust enjoin*d to shear
The graceful curl, and drop the tender tear.
Then, mingling in the mournful pomp with you,
I*ll pay my brother*s ghost a warrior*s due,
And mourn the brave Antilochus, a name
Not unrecorded in the rolls of fame;
With strength and speed superior form*d, in fight
To face the foe, or intercept his flight;
Too early snatch*d by fate ere known to me!
I boast a witness of his worth in thee.*

*Young and mature! (the monarch thus rejoins,)
In thee renew*d the soul of Nestor shines;
Form*d by the care of that consummate sage,
In early bloom an oracle of age.
Whene*er his influence Jove vouchsafes to shower,
To bless the natal and the nuptial hour;
From the great sire transmissive to the race,
The boon devolving gives distinguish*d grace.
Such, happy Nestor! was thy glorious doom,
Around thee, full of years, thy offspring bloom.
Expert of arms, and prudent in debate;
The gifts of Heaven to guard thy hoary state.
But now let each becalm his troubled breast,
Wash, and partake serene the friendly feast.
To move thy suit, Telemachus, delay,
Till heaven*s revolving lamp restores the day.*

He said, Asphalion swift the laver brings;
Alternate, all partake the grateful springs;
Then from the rites of purity repair,
And with keen gust the savoury viands share.
Meantime, with genial joy to warm the soul,
Bright Helen mix*d a mirth inspiring bowl;
Temper*d with drugs of sovereign use, to assuage
The boiling bosom of tumultuous rage;
To clear the cloudy front of wrinkled Care,
And dry the tearful sluices of Despair;
Charm*d with that virtuous draught, the exalted mind
All sense of woe delivers to the wind.
Though on the blazing pile his parent lay,
Or a loved brother groan*d his life away,
Or darling son, oppress*d by ruffian force,
Fell breathless at his feet, a mangled corse;
From morn to eve, impassive and serene,
The man entranced would view the dreadful scene.
These drugs, so friendly to the joys of life,
Bright Helen learn*d from Thone*s imperial wife;
Who sway*d the sceptre, where prolific Nile
With various simples clothes the fatten*d soil.
With wholesome herbage mix*d, the direful bane
Of vegetable venom taints the plain;
From Paeon sprung, their patron-god imparts
To all the Pharian race his healing arts.
The beverage now prepared to inspire the feast,
The circle thus the beauteous queen addressed:

*Throned in omnipotence, supremest Jove
Tempers the fates of human race above;
By the firm sanction of his sovereign will,
Alternate are decreed our good and ill.
To feastful mirth be this white hour assign*d.
And sweet discourse, the banquet of the mind
Myself, assisting in the social joy,
Will tell Ulysses* bold exploit in Troy,
Sole witness of the deed I now declare
Speak you (who saw) his wonders in the war.

*Seam*d o*er with wounds, which his own sabre gave,
In the vile habit of a village slave,
The foe deceived, he pass*d the tented plain,
In Troy to mingle with the hostile train.
In this attire secure from searching eyes,
Till happily piercing through the dark disguise,
The chief I challenged; he, whose practised wit
Knew all the serpent mazes of deceit,
Eludes my search; but when his form I view*d
Fresh from the bath, with fragrant oils renew*d,
His limbs in military purple dress*d,
Each brightening grace the genuine Greek confess*d.
A previous pledge of sacred faith obtain*d,
Till he the lines and Argive fleet regain*d,
To keep his stay conceal*d; the chief declared
The plans of war against the town prepared.
Exploring then the secrets of the state,
He learn*d what best might urge the Dardan fate;
And, safe returning to the Grecian host,
Sent many a shade to Pluto*s dreary coast.
Loud grief resounded through the towers of Troy,
But my pleased bosom glow*d with secret joy:
For then, with dire remorse and conscious shame
I view*d the effects of that disastrous flame,
Which, kindled by the imperious queen of love,
Constrain*d me from my native realm to rove:
And oft in bitterness of soul deplored
My absent daughter and my dearer lord;
Admired among the first of human race,
For every gift of mind and manly grace.*

*Right well (replied the king) your speech displays
The matchless merit of the chief you praise:
Heroes in various climes myself have found,
For martial deeds and depth of thought renown*d;
But Ithacus, unrivall*d in his claim,
May boast a title to the loudest fame:
In battle calm he guides the rapid storm,
Wise to resolve, and patient to perform.
What wondrous conduct in the chief appear*d,
When the vast fabric of the steed we rear*d!
Some demon, anxious for the Trojan doom,
Urged you with great Deiphobus to come,
To explore the fraud; with guile opposed to guile.
Slow-pacing thrice around the insidious pile,
Each noted leader*s name you thrice invoke,
Your accent varying as their spouses spoke!
The pleasing sounds each latent warrior warm*d,
But most Tydides* and my heart alarm*d:
To quit the steed we both impatient press
Threatening to answer from the dark recess.
Unmoved the mind of Ithacus remain*d;
And the vain ardours of our love restrain*d;
But Anticlus, unable to control,
Spoke loud the language of his yearning soul:
Ulysses straight, with indignation fired
(For so the common care of Greece required),
Firm to his lips his forceful hands applied,
Till on his tongue the fluttering murmurs died.
Meantime Minerva, from the fraudful horse,
Back to the court of Priam bent your course.*

*Inclement fate! (Telemachus replies,)
Frail is the boasted attribute of wise:
The leader mingling with the vulgar host,
Is in the common mass of matter lost!
But now let sleep the painful waste repair
Of sad reflection and corroding care.*
He ceased; the menial fair that round her wait,
At Helen*s beck prepare the room of state;
Beneath an ample portico they spread
The downy fleece to form the slumberous bed;
And o*er soft palls of purple grain unfold
Rich tapestry, stiff with interwoven gold:
Then, through the illumined dome, to balmy rest
The obsequious herald guides each princely guest;
While to his regal bower the king ascends,
And beauteous Helen on her lord attends.
Soon as the morn, in orient purple dress*d,
Unbarr*d the portal of the roseate east,
The monarch rose; magnificent to view,
The imperial mantle o*er his vest he threw;
The glittering zone athwart his shoulders cast,
A starry falchion low-depending graced;
Clasp*d on his feet the embroidered sandals shine;
And forth he moves, majestic and divine,
Instant to young Telemachus he press*d;
And thus benevolent his speech addressed:

*Say, royal youth, sincere of soul report
Whit cause hath led you to the Spartan court?
Do public or domestic care constrain
This toilsome voyage o*er the surgy main?*

*O highly-favour*d delegate of Jove!
(Replies the prince) inflamed with filial love,
And anxious hope, to hear my parent*s doom,
A suppliant to your royal court I come:
Our sovereign seat a lewd usurping race
With lawless riot and misrule disgrace;
To pamper*d insolence devoted fall
Prime of the flock, and choicest of the stall:
For wild ambition wings their bold desire,
And all to mount the imperial bed aspire.
But prostrate I implore, O king! relate
The mournful series of my father*s fate:
Each known disaster of the man disclose,
Born by his mother to a world of woes!
Recite them; nor in erring pity fear
To wound with storied grief the filial ear.
If e*er Ulysses, to reclaim your right,
Avow*d his zeal in council or in fight,
If Phrygian camps the friendly toils attest,
To the sire*s merit give the son*s request.*

Deep from his inmost soul Atrides sigh*d,
And thus, indignant, to the prince replied:
*Heavens! would a soft, inglorious, dastard train
An absent hero*s nuptial joys profane!
So with her young, amid the woodland shades,
A timorous hind the lion*s court invades,
Leaves in the fatal lair the tender fawns,
Climbs the green cliff, or feeds the flowery lawns:
Meantime return*d, with dire remorseless sway,
The monarch-savage rends the trembling prey.
With equal fury, and with equal fame,
Ulysses soon shall reassert his claim.
O Jove supreme, whom gods and men revere!
And thou! to whom *tis given to gild the sphere!
With power congenial join*d, propitious aid
The chief adopted by the martial maid!
Such to our wish the warrior soon restore,
As when contending on the Lesbian shore
His prowess Philomelidies confess*d,
And loud-acclaiming Greeks the victor bless*d;
Then soon the invaders of his bed and throne
Their love presumptuous shall with life atone.
With patient ear, O royal youth, attend
The storied labour of thy father*s friend:
Fruitful of deeds, the copious tale is long,
But truth severe shall dictate to my tongue:
Learn what I heard the sea-born seer relate,
Whose eye can pierce the dark recess of fate.

*Long on the Egyptian coast by calms confined,
Heaven to my fleet refused a prosperous wind;
No vows had we preferr*d, nor victims slain!
For this the gods each favouring gale restrain
Jealous, to see their high behests obey*d;
Severe, if men the eternal rights evade.
High o*er a gulfy sea, the Pharian isle
Fronts the deep roar of disemboguing Nile:
Her distance from the shore, the course begun
At dawn, and ending with the setting sun,
A galley measures; when the stiffer gales
Rise on the poop, and fully stretch the sails.
There, anchor*d vessels safe in harbour lie,
Whilst limpid springs the failing cask supply.

*And now the twentieth sun, descending, laves
His glowing axle in the western waves:
Still with expanded sails we court in vain
Propitious winds to waft us o*er the main;
And the pale mariner at once deplores
His drooping vigour and exhausted stores.
When lo! a bright cerulean form appears,
Proteus her sire divine. With pity press*d,
Me sole the daughter of the deep address*d;
What time, with hunger pined, my absent mates
Roam the wide isle in search of rural cates,
Bait the barb*d steel, and from the fishy flood
Appease the afflictive fierce desire of food.*

**Whoe*er thou art (the azure goddess cries)
Thy conduct ill-deserves the praise of wise:
Is death thy choice, or misery thy boast,
That here inglorious, on a barren coast,
Thy brave associates droop, a meagre train,
With famine pale, and ask thy care in vain?*
*Struck with the loud reproach, I straight reply:
*Whate*er thy title in thy native sky,
A goddess sure! for more than moral grace
Speaks thee descendant of ethereal race;
Deem not that here of choice my fleet remains;
Some heavenly power averse my stay constrains:
O, piteous of my fate, vouchsafe to show
(For what*s sequester*d from celestial view?)
What power becalms the innavigable seas?
What guilt provokes him, and what vows appease?*

*I ceased, when affable the goddess cried:
*Observe, and in the truths I speak confide;
The oracular seer frequents the Pharian coast,
From whose high bed my birth divine I boast;
Proteus, a name tremendous o*er the main,
The delegate of Neptune*s watery reign.
Watch with insidious care his known abode;
There fast in chains constrain the various god;
Who bound, obedient to superior force,
Unerring will prescribe your destined course.
If, studious on your realms, you then demand
Their state, since last you left your natal land,
Instant the god obsequious will disclose
Bright tracts of glory or a cloud of woes.*

*She ceased; and suppliant thus I made reply:
*O goddess! on thy aid my hopes rely;
Dictate propitious to my duteous ear,
What arts can captivate the changeful seer;
For perilous the assay, unheard the toil,
To elude the prescience of a god by guile.*

*Thus to the goddess mild my suit I end.
Then she: *Obedient to my rule attend:
When through the zone of heaven the mounted sun
Hath journeyed half, and half remains to run;
The seer, while zephyrs curl the swelling deep,
Basks on the breezy shore, in grateful sleep,
His oozy limbs. Emerging from the wave,
The Phocas swift surround his rocky cave,
Frequent and full; the consecrated train
Of her, whose azure trident awes the main;
There wallowing warm, the enormous herd exhales
An oily steam, and taints the noontide gales.
To that recess, commodious for surprise,
When purple light shall next suffuse the skies,
With me repair; and from thy warrior-band
Three chosen chiefs of dauntless soul command;
Let their auxiliar force befriend the toil;
For strong the god, and perfected in guile.
Stretch*d on the shelly shore, he first surveys
The flouncing herd ascending from the seas;
Their number summ*d, reposed in sleep profound
The scaly charge their guardian god surround;
So with his battening flocks the careful swain
Abides pavilion*d on the grassy plain.
With powers united, obstinately bold,
Invade him, couch*d amid the scaly fold;
Instant he wears, elusive of the rape,
The mimic force of every savage shape;
Or glides with liquid lapse a murmuring stream,
Or, wrapp*d in flame, he glows at every limb.
Yet, still retentive, with redoubled might,
Through each vain passive form constrain his flight
But when, his native shape renamed, he stands
Patient of conquest, and your cause demands;
The cause that urged the bold attempt declare,
And soothe the vanquish*d with a victor*s prayer.
The bands releas*d, implore the seer to say
What godhead interdicts the watery way.
Who, straight propitious, in prophetic strain
Will teach you to repass the unmeasured main.*
She ceased, and bounding from the shelfy shore,
Round the descending nymph the waves resounding roar.

*High wrapp*d in wonder of the future deed,
with joy impetuous to the port I speed:
The wants of nature with repast suffice,
Till night with grateful shade involved the skies,
And shed ambrosial dews. Fast by the deep,
Along the tented shore, in balmy sleep,
Our cares were lost. When o*er the eastern lawn,
In saffron robes, the daughter of the dawn
Advanced her rosy steps, before the bay
Due ritual honours to the gods I pay;
Then seek the place the sea-born nymph assign*d,
With three associates of undaunted mind.
Arrived, to form along the appointed strand
For each a bed, she scoops the hilly sand;
Then, from her azure cave the finny spoils
Of four vast Phocae takes, to veil her wiles;
Beneath the finny spoils extended prone,
Hard toil! the prophet*s piercing eye to shun;
New from the corse, the scaly frauds diffuse
Unsavoury stench of oil, and brackish ooze;
But the bright sea-maid*s gentle power implored,
With nectar*d drops the sickening sense restored.

*Thus till the sun had travell*d half the skies,
Ambush*d we lie, and wait the bold emprise;
When, thronging quick to bask in open air,
The flocks of ocean to the strand repair;
Couch*d on the sunny sand, the monsters sleep;
Then Proteus, mounting from the hoary deep,
Surveys his charge, unknowing of deceit;
(In order told, we make the sum complete.)
Pleased with the false review, secure he lies,
And leaden slumbers press his drooping eyes.
Rushing impetuous forth, we straight prepare
A furious onset with the sound of war,
And shouting seize the god; our force to evade,
His various arts he soon resumes in aid;
A lion now, he curls a surgy mane;
Sudden our hands a spotted pard restrain;
Then, arm*d with tusks, and lightning in his eyes,
A boar*s obscener shape the god belies;
On spiry volumes, there a dragon rides;
Here, from our strict embrace a stream he glides.
At last, sublime, his stately growth he rears
A tree, and well-dissembled foliage wears.
Vain efforts with superior power compress*d,
Me with reluctance thus the seer address*d;
*Say, son of Atreus, say what god inspired
This daring fraud, and what the boon desired?*
I thus: *O thou, whose certain eye foresees
The fix*d event of fate*s remote decrees;
After long woes, and various toil endured,
Still on this desert isle my fleet is moor*d,
Unfriended of the gales. All-knowing, say,
What godhead interdicts the watery way?
What vows repentant will the power appease,
To speed a prosperous voyage o*er the seas.*

**To Jove (with stern regard the god replies)
And all the offended synod of the skies,
Just hecatombs with due devotion slain,
Thy guilt absolved, a prosperous voyage gain.
To the firm sanction of thy fate attend!
An exile thou, nor cheering face of friend,
Nor sight of natal shore, nor regal dome,
Shalt yet enjoy, but still art doom*d to roam.
Once more the Nile, who from the secret source
Of Jove*s high seat descends with sweepy force,
Must view his billows white beneath thy oar,
And altars blaze along his sanguine shore.
Then will the gods with holy pomp adored,
To thy long vows a safe return accord.*

*He ceased: heart wounded with afflictive pain,
(Doom*d to repeat the perils of the main,
A shelfy track and long!) *O seer* I cry,
*To the stern sanction of the offended sky
My prompt obedience bows. But deign to say
What fate propitious, or what dire dismay,
Sustain those peers, the relics of our host,
Whom I with Nestor on the Phrygian coast
Embracing left? Must I the warriors weep,
Whelm*d in the bottom of the monstrous deep?
Or did the kind domestic friend deplore
The breathless heroes on their native shore?

**Press not too far,* replied the god: *but cease
To know what, known, will violate thy peace;
Too curious of their doom! with friendly woe
Thy breast will heave, and tears eternal flow.
Part live! the rest, a lamentable train!
Range the dark bounds of Pluto*s dreary reign.
Two, foremost in the roll of Mars renown*d,
Whose arms with conquest in thy cause were crown*d,
Fell by disastrous fate: by tempests toss*d,
A third lives wretched on a distant coast.

*By Neptune rescued from Minerva*s hate,
On Gyrae, safe Oilean Ajax sate,
His ship o*erwhelm*d; but, frowning on the floods,
Impious he roar*d defiance to the gods;
To his own prowess all the glory gave:
The power defrauding who vouchsafed to save.
This heard the raging ruler of the main;
His spear, indignant for such high disdain,
He launched; dividing with his forky mace
The a*rial summit from the marble base:
The rock rush*d seaward, with impetuous roar
Ingulf*d, and to the abyss the boaster bore.

*By Juno*s guardian aid, the watery vast,
Secure of storms, your royal brother pass*d,
Till, coasting nigh the cape where Malen shrouds
Her spiry cliffs amid surrounding clouds,
A whirling gust tumultuous from the shore
Across the deep his labouring vessel bore.
In an ill-fated hour the coast he gain*d,
Where late in regal pomp Thyestes reigned;
But, when his hoary honours bow*d to fate,
*gysthus govern*d in paternal state,
The surges now subside, the tempest ends;
From his tall ship the king of men descends;
There fondly thinks the gods conclude his toil:
Far from his own domain salutes the soil;
With rapture oft the verge of Greece reviews,
And the dear turf with tears of joy bedews.
Him, thus exulting on the distant stand,
A spy distinguish*d from his airy stand;
To bribe whose vigilance, *gysthus told
A mighty sum of ill-persuading gold:
There watch*d this guardian of his guilty fear,
Till the twelfth moon had wheel*d her pale career;
And now, admonish*d by his eye, to court
With terror wing*d conveys the dread report.
Of deathful arts expert, his lord employs
The ministers of blood in dark surprise;
And twenty youths, in radiant mail incased,
Close ambush*d nigh the spacious hall he placed.
Then bids prepare the hospitable treat:
Vain shows of love to veil his felon hate!
To grace the victor*s welcome from the wars,
A train of coursers and triumphal cars
Magnificent he leads: the royal guest,
Thoughtless of ill, accepts the fraudful feast.
The troop forth-issuing from the dark recess,
With homicidal rage the king oppress!
So, whilst he feeds luxurious in the stall,
The sovereign of the herd is doomed to fall,
The partners of his fame and toils at Troy,
Around their lord, a mighty ruin, lie:
Mix*d with the brave, the base invaders bleed;
*gysthus sole survives to boast the deed.*

*He said: chill horrors shook my shivering soul,
Rack*d with convulsive pangs in dust I roll;
And hate, in madness of extreme despair,
To view the sun, or breathe the vital air.
But when, superior to the rage of woe,
I stood restored and tears had ceased to flow,
Lenient of grief the pitying god began:
*Forget the brother, and resume the man.
To Fate*s supreme dispose the dead resign,
That care be Fate*s, a speedy passage thine
Still lives the wretch who wrought the death deplored,
But lives a victim for thy vengeful sword;
Unless with filial rage Orestes glow,
And swift prevent the meditated blow:
You timely will return a welcome guest,
With him to share the sad funereal feast.*

*He said: new thoughts my beating heart employ,
My gloomy soul receives a gleam of joy.
Fair hope revives; and eager I address*d
The prescient godhead to reveal the rest:
*The doom decreed of those disastrous two
I*ve heard with pain, but oh! the tale pursue;
What third brave son of Mars the Fates constrain
To roam the howling desert of the main;
Or, in eternal shade of cold he lies,
Provoke new sorrows from these grateful eyes.*

**That chief (rejoin*d the god) his race derives
From Ithaca, and wondrous woes survives;
Laertes* son: girt with circumfluous tides,
He still calamitous constraint abides.
Him in Calypso*s cave of late I view*d,
When streaming grief his faded cheek bedow*d.
But vain his prayer, his arts are vain, to move
The enamour*d goddess, or elude her love:
His vessel sunk, and dear companions lost,
He lives reluctant on a foreign coast.
But oh, beloved by Heaven! reserved to thee
A happier lot the smiling Fates decree:
Free from that law, beneath whose mortal sway
Matter is changed, and varying forms decay,
Elysium shall be thine: the blissful plains
Of utmost earth, where Rhadamanthus reigns.
Joys ever young, unmix*d with pain or fear,
Fill the wide circle of the eternal year:
Stern winter smiles on that auspicious clime:
The fields are florid with unfading prime;
From the bleak pole no winds inclement blow,
Mould the round hail, or flake the fleecy snow;
But from the breezy deep the blest inhale
The fragrant murmurs of the western gale.
This grace peculiar will the gods afford
To thee, the son of Jove, and beauteous Helen*s lord.*

*He ceased, and plunging in the vast profound,
Beneath the god and whirling billows bound.
Then speeding back, involved in various thought,
My friends attending at the shore I sought,
Arrived, the rage of hunger we control
Till night with silent shade invests the pole;
Then lose the cares of life in pleasing rest.
Soon as the morn reveals the roseate east,
With sails we wing the masts, our anchors weigh,
Unmoor the fleet, and rush into the sea.
Ranged on the banks, beneath our equal oars
White curl the waves, and the vex*d ocean roars
Then, steering backward from the Pharian isle,
We gain the stream of Jove-descended Nile;
There quit the ships, and on the destined shore
With ritual hecatombs the gods adore;
Their wrath atoned, to Agamemnon*s name
A cenotaph I raise of deathless fame.
These rites to piety and grief discharged,
The friendly gods a springing gale enlarged;
The fleet swift tilting o*er the surges flew,
Till Grecian cliffs appear*d a blissful view!

*Thy patient ear hath heard me long relate
A story, fruitful of disastrous fate.
And now, young prince, indulge my fond request;
Be Sparta honoured with his royal guest,
Till, from his eastern goal, the joyous sun
His twelfth diurnal race begins to run.
Meantime my train the friendly gifts prepare,
The sprightly coursers and a polish*d car;
With these a goblet of capacious mould,
Figured with art to dignify the gold
(Form*d for libation to the gods), shall prove
A pledge and monument of sacred love.*

*My quick return (young Ithacus rejoin*d),
Damps the warm wishes of my raptured mind;
Did not my fate my needful haste constrain,
Charm*d by your speech so graceful and humane,
Lost in delight the circling year would roll,
While deep attention fix*d my listening soul.
But now to Pyle permit my destined way,
My loved associates chide my long delay:
In dear remembrance of your royal grace,
I take the present of the promised vase;
The coursers, for the champaign sports retain;
That gift our barren rocks will render vain:
Horrid with cliffs, our meagre land allows
Thin herbage for the mountain goat to browse,
But neither mead nor plain supplies, to feed
The sprightly courser, or indulge his speed:
To sea-surrounded realms the gods assign
Small tract of fertile lawn, the least to mine.*

His hand the king with tender passion press*d,
And, smiling, thus the royal youth address*d:
*O early worth! a soul so wise, and young,
Proclaims you from the sage Ulysses sprung.
Selected from my stores, of matchless price,
An urn shall recompense your prudent choice;
By Vulcan*s art, the verge with gold enchased.
A pledge the sceptred power of Sidon gave,
When to his realm I plough*d the orient wave.*

Thus they alternate; while, with artful care,
The menial train the regal feast prepare.
The firstlings of the flock are doom*d to die:
Rich fragrant wines the cheering bowl supply;
A female band the gift of Ceres bring;
And the gilt roofs with genial triumph ring.

Meanwhile, in Ithaca, the suitor powers
In active games divide their jovial hours;
In areas varied with mosaic art,
Some whirl the disk, and some the javelin dart,
Aside, sequester*d from the vast resort,
Antinous sole spectator of the sport;
With great Eurymachus, of worth confess*d,
And high descent, superior to the rest;
Whom young No*mon lowly thus address*d:*

*My ship, equipp*d within the neighboring port,
The prince, departing for the Pylian court,
Requested for his speed; but, courteous, say
When steers he home, or why this long delay?
For Elis I should sail with utmost speed,
To import twelve mares which there luxurious feed,
And twelve young mules, a strong laborious race,
New to the plow, unpractised in the trace.*

Unknowing of the course to Pyle design*d,
A sudden horror seized on either mind;
The prince in rural bower they fondly thought,
Numbering his flocks and herds, not far remote.
*Relate (Antinous cries), devoid of guile,
When spread the prince his sale for distant Pyle?
Did chosen chiefs across the gulfy main
Attend his voyage, or domestic train?
Spontaneous did you speed his secret course,
Or was the vessel seized by fraud or force?*

*With willing duty, not reluctant mind
(No*mon cried), the vessel was resign*d,
Who, in the balance, with the great affairs
Of courts presume to weigh their private cares?
With him, the peerage next in power to you;
And Mentor, captain of the lordly crew,
Or some celestial in his reverend form,
Safe from the secret rock and adverse storm,
Pilots the course; for when the glimmering ray
Of yester dawn disclosed the tender day,
Mentor himself I saw, and much admired,*
Then ceased the youth, and from the court retired.

Confounded and appall*d, the unfinish*d game
The suitors quit, and all to council came.
Antinous first the assembled peers address*d.
Rage sparkling in his eyes, and burning in his breast

*O shame to manhood! shall one daring boy
The scheme of all our happiness destroy?
Fly unperceived, seducing half the flower
Of nobles, and invite a foreign power?
The ponderous engine raised to crush us all,
Recoiling, on his head is sure to fall.
Instant prepare me, on the neighbouring strand,
With twenty chosen mates a vessel mann*d;
For ambush*d close beneath the Samian shore
His ship returning shall my spies explore;
He soon his rashness shall with life atone,
Seek for his father*s fate, but find his own.*

With vast applause the sentence all approve;
Then rise, and to the feastful hall remove;
Swift to the queen the herald Medon ran,
Who heard the consult of the dire divan:
Before her dome the royal matron stands,
And thus the message of his haste demands;

*What will the suitors? must my servant-train
The allotted labours of the day refrain,
For them to form some exquisite repast?
Heaven grant this festival may prove their last!
Or, if they still must live, from me remove
The double plague of luxury and love!
Forbear, ye sons of insolence! forbear,
In riot to consume a wretched heir.
In the young soul illustrious thought to raise,
Were ye not tutor*d with Ulysses* praise?
Have not your fathers oft my lord defined,
Gentle of speech, beneficent of mind?
Some kings with arbitrary rage devour,
Or in their tyrant-minions vest the power;
Ulysses let no partial favours fall,
The people*s parent, he protected all;
But absent now, perfidious and ingrate!
His stores ye ravage, and usurp his state.*

He thus: *O were the woes you speak the worst!
They form a deed more odious and accursed;
More dreadful than your boding soul divines;
But pitying Jove avert the dire designs!
The darling object of your royal care
Is marked to perish in a deathful snare;
Before he anchors in his native port,
From Pyle re-sailing and the Spartan court;
Horrid to speak! in ambush is decreed
The hope and heir of Ithaca to bleed!*

Sudden she sunk beneath the weighty woes,
The vital streams a chilling horror froze;
The big round tear stands trembling in her eye,
And on her tongue imperfect accents die.
At length in tender language interwove
With sighs, she thus expressed her anxious love;
*Why rarely would my son his fate explore,
Ride the wild waves, and quit the safer shore?
Did he with all the greatly wretched, crave
A blank oblivion, and untimely grave?*

*Tis not (replied the sage) to Medon given
To know, if some inhabitant of heaven
In his young breast the daring thought inspired
Or if, alone with filial duty fired,
The winds and waves he tempts in early bloom,
Studious to learn his absent father*s doom.*

The sage retired: unable to control
The mighty griefs that swell her labouring soul
Rolling convulsive on the floor is seen
The piteous object of a prostrate queen.
Words to her dumb complaint a pause supplies,
And breath, to waste in unavailing cries.
Around their sovereign wept the menial fair,
To whom she thus address*d her deep despair:

*Behold a wretch whom all the gods consign
To woe! Did ever sorrows equal mine?
Long to my joys my dearest lord is lost,
His country*s buckler, and the Grecian boast;
Now from my fond embrace, by tempests torn,
Our other column of the state is borne;
Nor took a kind adieu, nor sought consent!*
Unkind confederates in his dire intent!
Ill suits it with your shows of duteous zeal,
From me the purposed voyage to conceal;
Though at the solemn midnight hour he rose,
Why did you fear to trouble my repose?
He either had obey*d my fond desire,
Or seen his mother pierced with grief expire.
Bid Dolius quick attend, the faithful slave
Whom to my nuptial train Icarius gave
To tend the fruit groves: with incessant speed
He shall this violence of death decreed
To good Laertes tell. Experienced age
May timely intercept the ruffian rage.
Convene the tribes the murderous plot reveal,
And to their power to save his race appeal.*

Then Euryclea thus: *My dearest dread;
Though to the sword I bow this hoary head,
Or if a dungeon be the pain decreed,
I own me conscious of the unpleasing deed;
Auxiliar to his flight, my aid implored,
With wine and viands I the vessel stored;
A solemn oath, imposed, the secret seal*d,
Till the twelfth dawn the light of day reveal*d.
Dreading the effect of a fond mother*s fear,
He dared not violate your royal ear.
But bathe, and, in imperial robes array*d,
Pay due devotions to the martial maid,
And rest affianced in her guardian aid.
Send not to good Laertes, nor engage
In toils of state the miseries of age:
Tis impious to surmise the powers divine
To ruin doom the Jove-descended line;
Long shall the race of just Arcesius reign,
And isles remote enlarge his old domain.*

The queen her speech with calm attention hears,
Her eyes restrain the silver-streaming tears:
She bathes, and robed, the sacred dome ascends;
Her pious speed a female train attends:
The salted cakes in canisters are laid,
And thus the queen invokes Minerva*s aid;

*Daughter divine of Jove, whose arm can wield
The avenging bolt, and shake the dreadful shield
If e*er Ulysses to thy fane preferr*d
The best and choicest of his flock and herd;
Hear, goddess, hear, by those oblations won;
And for the pious sire preserve the son;
His wish*d return with happy power befriend,
And on the suitors let thy wrath descend.*

She ceased; shrill ecstasies of joy declare
The favouring goddess present to the prayer;
The suitors heard, and deem*d the mirthful voice
A signal of her hymeneal choice;
Whilst one most jovial thus accosts the board:

*Too late the queen selects a second lord;
In evil hour the nuptial rite intends,
When o*er her son disastrous death impends.*
Thus he, unskill*d of what the fates provide!
But with severe rebuke Antinous cried:

*These empty vaunts will make the voyage vain:
Alarm not with discourse the menial train:
The great event with silent hope attend,
Our deeds alone our counsel must commend.*
His speech thus ended short, he frowning rose,
And twenty chiefs renowned for valour chose;
Down to the strand he speeds with haughty strides,
Where anchor*d in the bay the vessel rides,
Replete with mail and military store,
In all her tackle trim to quit the shore.
The desperate crew ascend, unfurl the sails
(The seaward prow invites the tardy gales);
Then take repast till Hesperus display*d
His golden circlet, in the western shade.

Meantime the queen, without reflection due,
Heart-wounded, to the bed of state withdrew:
In her sad breast the prince*s fortunes roll,
And hope and doubt alternate seize her soul.
So when the woodman*s toil her cave surrounds,
And with the hunter*s cry the grove resounds,
With grief and rage the mother-lion stung,
Fearless herself, yet trembles for her young,
While pensive in the silent slumberous shade,
Sleep*s gentle powers her drooping eyes invade;
Minerva, life-like, on embodied air
Impress*d the form of Iphthima the fair;
(Icarius* daughter she, whose blooming charms
Allured Eumelus to her virgin arms;
A sceptred lord, who o*er the fruitful plain
Of Thessaly wide stretched his ample reign:)
As Pallas will*d, along the sable skies,
To calm the queen, the phantom sister flies.
Swift on the regal dome, descending right,
The bolted valves are pervious to her flight.
Close to her head the pleasing vision stands,
And thus performs Minerva*s high commands

*O why, Penelope, this causeless fear,
To render sleep*s soft blessing unsincere?
Alike devote to sorrow*s dire extreme
The day-reflection, and the midnight-dream!
Thy son the gods propitious will restore,
And bid thee cease his absence to deplore.*

To whom the queen (whilst yet in pensive mind
Was in the silent gates of sleep confined):
*O sister to my soul forever dear,
Why this first visit to reprove my fear?
How in a realm so distant should you know
From what deep source my ceaseless sorrows flow?
To all my hope my royal lord is lost,
His country*s buckler, and the Grecian boast;
And with consummate woe to weigh me down,
The heir of all his honours and his crown,
My darling son is fled! an easy prey
To the fierce storms, or men more fierce than they;
Who, in a league of blood associates sworn,
Will intercept the unwary youth*s return.*

*Courage resume (the shadowy form replied);
In the protecting care of Heaven confide;
On him attends the blue eyed martial maid:
What earthly can implore a surer aid?
Me now the guardian goddess deigns to send,
To bid thee patient his return attend.*

The queen replies: *If in the blest abodes,
A goddess, thou hast commerce with the gods;
Say, breathes my lord the blissful realm of light,
Or lies he wrapp*d in ever-during night?*

*Inquire not of his doom, (the phantom cries,)
I speak not all the counsel of the skies;
Nor must indulge with vain discourse, or long,
The windy satisfaction of the tongue.*

Swift through the valves the visionary fair
Repass*d, and viewless mix*d with common air.
The queen awakes, deliver*d of her woes;
With florid joy her heart dilating glows:
The vision, manifest of future fate,
Makes her with hope her son*s arrival wait.

Meantime the suitors plough the watery plain,
Telemachus in thought already slain!
When sight of lessening Ithaca was lost
Their sail directed for the Samian coast
A small but verdant isle appear*d in view,
And Asteris the advancing pilot knew;
An ample port the rocks projected form,
To break the rolling waves and ruffling storm:
That safe recess they gain with happy speed,
And in close ambush wait the murderous deed.




BOOK V.


ARGUMENT.
THE DEPARTURE OF ULYSSES FROM CALYPSO


Pallas in a council of the gods complains of the detention of Ulysses
in the Island of Calypso: whereupon Mercury is sent to command his
removal. The seat of Calypso described. She consents with much
difficulty; and Ulysses builds a vessel with his own hands, in which he
embarks. Neptune overtakes him with a terrible tempest, in which he is
shipwrecked, and in the last danger of death; till Lencothea, a
sea-goddess, assists him, and, after innumerable perils, he gets ashore
on Ph*acia.


The saffron morn, with early blushes spread,
Now rose refulgent from Tithonus* bed;
With new-born day to gladden mortal sight,
And gild the courts of heaven with sacred light.
Then met the eternal synod of the sky,
Before the god, who thunders from on high,
Supreme in might, sublime in majesty.
Pallas, to these, deplores the unequal fates
Of wise Ulysses and his toils relates:
Her hero*s danger touch*d the pitying power,
The nymph*s seducements, and the magic bower.
Thus she began her plaint: *Immortal Jove!
And you who fill the blissful seats above!
Let kings no more with gentle mercy sway,
Or bless a people willing to obey,
But crush the nations with an iron rod,
And every monarch be the scourge of God.
If from your thoughts Ulysses you remove,
Who ruled his subjects with a father*s love,
Sole in an isle, encircled by the main,
Abandon*d, banish*d from his native reign,
Unbless*d he sighs, detained by lawless charms,
And press*d unwilling in Calypso*s arms.
Nor friends are there, nor vessels to convey,
Nor oars to cut the immeasurable way.
And now fierce traitors, studious to destroy
His only son, their ambush*d fraud employ;
Who, pious, following his great father*s fame,
To sacred Pylos and to Sparta came.*

*What words are these? (replied the power who forms
The clouds of night, and darkens heaven with storms;)
Is not already in thy soul decreed,
The chief*s return shall make the guilty bleed?
What cannot Wisdom do? Thou may*st restore
The son in safety to his native shore;
While the fell foes, who late in ambush lay,
With fraud defeated measure back their way.*

Then thus to Hermes the command was given:
*Hermes, thou chosen messenger of heaven!
Go, to the nymph be these our orders borne
*Tis Jove*s decree, Ulysses shall return:
The patient man shall view his old abodes,
Nor helped by mortal hand, nor guiding gods
In twice ten days shall fertile Scheria find,
Alone, and floating to the wave and wind.
The bold Ph*acians there, whose haughty line
Is mixed with gods, half human, half divine,
The chief shall honour as some heavenly guest,
And swift transport him to his place of rest,
His vessels loaded with a plenteous store
Of brass, of vestures, and resplendent ore
(A richer prize than if his joyful isle
Received him charged with Ilion*s noble spoil),
His friends, his country, he shall see, though late:
Such is our sovereign will, and such is fate.*

He spoke. The god who mounts the winged winds
Fast to his feet the golden pinions binds,
That high through fields of air his flight sustain
O*er the wide earth, and o*er the boundless main:
He grasps the wand that causes sleep to fly,
Or in soft slumber seals the wakeful eye;
Then shoots from heaven to high Pieria*s steep,
And stoops incumbent on the rolling deep.
So watery fowl, that seek their fishy food,
With wings expanded o*er the foaming flood,
Now sailing smooth the level surface sweep,
Now dip their pinions in the briny deep;
Thus o*er the world of waters Hermes flew,
Till now the distant island rose in view:
Then, swift ascending from the azure wave,
He took the path that winded to the cave.
Large was the grot, in which the nymph he found
(The fair-hair*d nymph with every beauty crown*d).
The cave was brighten*d with a rising blaze;
Cedar and frankincense, an odorous pile,
Flamed on the hearth, and wide perfumed the isle;
While she with work and song the time divides,
And through the loom the golden shuttle guides.
Without the grot a various sylvan scene
Appear*d around, and groves of living green;
Poplars and alders ever quivering play*d,
And nodding cypress form*d a fragrant shade:
On whose high branches, waving with the storm,
The birds of broadest wing their mansions form,*
The chough, the sea-mew, the loquacious crow,*
and scream aloft, and skim the deeps below.
Depending vines the shelving cavern screen.
With purple clusters blushing through the green.
Four limpid fountains from the clefts distil:
And every fountain pours a several rill,
In mazy windings wandering down the hill:
Where bloomy meads with vivid greens were crown*d,
And glowing violets threw odours round.
A scene, where, if a god should cast his sight,
A god might gaze, and wander with delight!
Joy touch*d the messenger of heaven: he stay*d
Entranced, and all the blissful haunts surveyed.
Him, entering in the cave, Calypso knew;
For powers celestial to each other*s view
Stand still confess*d, though distant far they lie
To habitants of earth, or sea, or sky.
But sad Ulysses, by himself apart,
Pour*d the big sorrows of his swelling heart;
All on the lonely shore he sate to weep,
And roll*d his eyes around the restless deep:
Toward his loved coast he roll*d his eyes in vain,
Till, dimm*d with rising grief, they stream*d again.

Now graceful seated on her shining throne,
To Hermes thus the nymph divine begun:

*God of the golden wand! on what behest
Arrivest thou here, an unexpected guest?
Loved as thou art, thy free injunctions lay;
*Tis mine with joy and duty to obey.
Till now a stranger, in a happy hour
Approach, and taste the dainties of my bower.*

Thus having spoke, the nymph the table spread
(Ambrosial cates, with nectar rosy-red);
Hermes the hospitable rite partook,
Divine refection! then, recruited, spoke:

*What moves this journey from my native sky,
A goddess asks, nor can a god deny.
Hear then the truth. By mighty Jove*s command
Unwilling have I trod this pleasing land:
For who, self-moved, with weary wing would sweep
Such length of ocean and unmeasured deep;
A world of waters! far from all the ways
Where men frequent, or sacred altars blaze!
But to Jove*s will submission we must pay;
What power so great to dare to disobey?
A man, he says, a man resides with thee,
Of all his kind most worn with misery.
The Greeks, (whose arms for nine long year employ*d
Their force on Ilion, in the tenth destroy*d,)
At length, embarking in a luckless hour,
With conquest proud, incensed Minerva*s power:
Hence on the guilty race her vengeance hurl*d,
With storms pursued them through the liquid world.
There all his vessels sunk beneath the wave!
There all his dear companions found their grave!
Saved from the jaws of death by Heaven*s decree,
The tempest drove him to these shores and thee.
Him, Jove now orders to his native lands
Straight to dismiss: so destiny commands:
Impatient Fate his near return attends,
And calls him to his country, and his friends.*

E*en to her inmost soul the goddess shook;
Then thus her anguish, and her passion broke:
*Ungracious gods! with spite and envy cursed!
Still to your own ethereal race the worst!
Ye envy mortal and immortal joy,
And love, the only sweet of life destroy,
Did ever goddess by her charms engage
A favour*d mortal, and not feel your rage?
So when Aurora sought Orion*s love,
Her joys disturbed your blissful hours above,
Till, in Ortygia Dian*s winged dart
Had pierced the hapless hunter to the heart,
So when the covert of the thrice-eared field
Saw stately Ceres to her passion yield,
Scarce could Iasion taste her heavenly charms,
But Jove*s swift lightning scorched him in her arms.
And is it now my turn, ye mighty powers!
Am I the envy of your blissful bowers?
A man, an outcast to the storm and wave,
It was my crime to pity, and to save;
When he who thunders rent his bark in twain,
And sunk his brave companions in the main,
Alone, abandon*d, in mid-ocean tossed,
The sport of winds, and driven from every coast,
Hither this man of miseries I led,
Received the friendless, and the hungry fed;
Nay promised (vainly promised) to bestow
Immortal life, exempt from age and woe.
*Tis past-and Jove decrees he shall remove;
Gods as we are, we are but slaves to Jove.
Go then he must (he must, if he ordain,
Try all those dangers, all those deeps, again);
But never, never shall Calypso send
To toils like these her husband and her friend.
What ships have I, what sailors to convey,
What oars to cut the long laborious way?
Yet I*ll direct the safest means to go;
That last advice is all I can bestow.*

To her the power who hears the charming rod;
*Dismiss the man, nor irritate the god;
Prevent the rage of him who reigns above,
For what so dreadful as the wrath of Jove?*
Thus having said, he cut the cleaving sky,
And in a moment vanished from her eye,
The nymph, obedient to divine command,
To seek Ulysses, paced along the sand,
Him pensive on the lonely beach she found,
With streaming eyes in briny torrents drown*d,
And inly pining for his native shore;
For now the soft enchantress pleased no more;
For now, reluctant, and constrained by charms,
Absent he lay in her desiring arms,
In slumber wore the heavy night away,
On rocks and shores consumed the tedious day;
There sate all desolate, and sighed alone,
With echoing sorrows made the mountains groan.
And roll*d his eyes o*er all the restless main,
Till, dimmed with rising grief, they streamed again.

Here, on his musing mood the goddess press*d,
Approaching soft, and thus the chief address*d:
*Unhappy man! to wasting woes a prey,
No more in sorrows languish life away:
Free as the winds I give thee now to rove:
Go, fell the timber of yon lofty grove,
And form a raft, and build the rising ship,
Sublime to bear thee o*er the gloomy deep.
To store the vessel let the care be mine,
With water from the rock and rosy wine,
And life-sustaining bread, and fair array,
And prosperous gales to waft thee on the way.
These, if the gods with my desire comply
(The gods, alas, more mighty far than I,
And better skill*d in dark events to come),
In peace shall land thee at thy native home.*

With sighs Ulysses heard the words she spoke,
Then thus his melancholy silence broke:
*Some other motive, goddess! sways thy mind
(Some close design, or turn of womankind),
Nor my return the end, nor this the way,
On a slight raft to pass the swelling sea,
Huge, horrid, vast! where scarce in safety sails
The best-built ship, though Jove inspires the gales.
The bold proposal how shall I fulfil,
Dark as I am, unconscious of thy will?
Swear, then, thou mean*st not what my soul forebodes;
Swear by the solemn oath that binds the gods.*

Him, while he spoke, with smiles Calypso eyed,
And gently grasp*d his hand, and thus replied:
*This shows thee, friend, by old experience taught,
And learn*d in all the wiles of human thought,
How prone to doubt, how cautious, are the wise!
But hear, O earth, and hear, ye sacred skies!
And thou, O Styx! whose formidable floods
Glide through the shades, and bind the attesting gods!
No form*d design, no meditated end,
Lurks in the counsel of thy faithful friend;
Kind the persuasion, and sincere my aim;
The same my practice, were my fate the same.
Heaven has not cursed me with a heart of steel,
But given the sense to pity, and to feel.*

Thus having said, the goddess marched before:
He trod her footsteps in the sandy shore.
At the cool cave arrived, they took their state;
He filled the throne where Mercury had sate.
For him the nymph a rich repast ordains,
Such as the mortal life of man sustains;
Before herself were placed the the cates divine,
Ambrosial banquet and celestial wine.
Their hunger satiate, and their thirst repress*d,
Thus spoke Calypso to her godlike guest:

*Ulysses! (with a sigh she thus began;)
O sprung from gods! in wisdom more than man!
Is then thy home the passion of thy heart?
Thus wilt thou leave me, are we thus to part?
Farewell! and ever joyful mayst thou be,
Nor break the transport with one thought of me.
But ah, Ulysses! wert thou given to know
What Fate yet dooms these still to undergo,
Thy heart might settle in this scene of ease.
And e*en these slighted charms might learn to please.
A willing goddess, and immortal life,
Might banish from thy mind an absent wife.
Am I inferior to a mortal dame?
Less soft my feature less august my frame?
Or shall the daughters of mankind compare
Their earth born beauties with the heavenly fair?*

*Alas! for this (the prudent man replies)
Against Ulysses shall thy anger rise?
Loved and adored, O goddess as thou art,
Forgive the weakness of a human heart.
Though well I see thy graces far above
The dear, though mortal, object of my love,
Of youth eternal well the difference know,
And the short date of fading charms below;
Yet every day, while absent thus I roam,
I languish to return and die at home.
Whate*er the gods shall destine me to bear;
In the black ocean or the watery war,
*Tis mine to master with a constant mind;
Inured to perils, to the worst resign*d,
By seas, by wars, so many dangers run;
Still I can suffer; their high will he done!*

Thus while he spoke, the beamy sun descends,
And rising night her friendly shade extends,
To the close grot the lonely pair remove,
And slept delighted with the gifts of love.
When rosy morning call*d them from their rest,
Ulysses robed him in the cloak and vest.
The nymph*s fair head a veil transparent graced,
Her swelling loins a radiant zone embraced
With flowers of gold; an under robe, unbound,
In snowy waves flow*d glittering on the ground.
Forth issuing thus, she gave him first to wield
A weighty axe with truest temper steeled,
And double-edged; the handle smooth and plain,
Wrought of the clouded olive*s easy grain;
And next, a wedge to drive with sweepy sway
Then to the neighboring forest led the way.
On the lone island*s utmost verge there stood
Of poplars, pine, and firs, a lofty wood,
Whose leafless summits to the skies aspire,
Scorch*d by the sun, or seared by heavenly fire
(Already dried). These pointing out to view,
The nymph just show*d him, and with tears withdrew.

Now toils the hero: trees on trees o*erthrown
Fall crackling round him, and the forests groan:
Sudden, full twenty on the plain are strow*d,
And lopp*d and lighten*d of their branchy load.
At equal angles these disposed to join,
He smooth*d and squared them by the rule and line,
(The wimbles for the work Calypso found)
With those he pierced them and with clinchers bound.
Long and capacious as a shipwright forms
Some bark*s broad bottom to out-ride the storms,
So large he built the raft; then ribb*d it strong
From space to space, and nail*d the planks along;
These form*d the sides: the deck he fashion*d last;
Then o*er the vessel raised the taper mast,
With crossing sail-yards dancing in the wind;
And to the helm the guiding rudder join*d
(With yielding osiers fenced, to break the force
Of surging waves, and steer the steady course).
Thy loom, Calypso, for the future sails
Supplied the cloth, capacious of the gales.
With stays and cordage last he rigged the ship,
And, roll*d on levers, launch*d her in the deep.

Four days were pass*d, and now the work complete,
Shone the fifth morn, when from her sacred seat
The nymph dismiss*d him (odorous garments given),
And bathed in fragrant oils that breathed of heaven:
Then fill*d two goatskins with her hands divine,
With water one, and one with sable wine:
Of every kind, provisions heaved aboard;
And the full decks with copious viands stored.
The goddess, last, a gentle breeze supplies,
To curl old Ocean, and to warm the skies.

And now, rejoicing in the prosperous gales,
With beating heart Ulysses spreads his sails;
Placed at the helm he sate, and mark*d the skies,
Nor closed in sleep his ever-watchful eyes.
There view*d the Pleiads, and the Northern Team,
And great Orion*s more refulgent beam.
To which, around the axle of the sky,
The Bear, revolving, points his golden eye:
Who shines exalted on the ethereal plain,
Nor bathes his blazing forehead in the main.
Far on the left those radiant fires to keep
The nymph directed, as he sail*d the deep.
Full seventeen nights he cut the foaming way:
The distant land appear*d the following day:
Then swell*d to sight Ph*acia*s dusky coast,
And woody mountains, half in vapours lost;
That lay before him indistinct and vast,
Like a broad shield amid the watery waste.

But him, thus voyaging the deeps below,
From far, on Solyme*s a*rial brow,
The king of ocean saw, and seeing burn*d
(From *thiopia*s happy climes return*d);
The raging monarch shook his azure head,
And thus in secret to his soul he said:
*Heavens! how uncertain are the powers on high!
Is then reversed the sentence of the sky,
In one man*s favour; while a distant guest
I shared secure the *thiopian feast?
Behold how near Ph*acia*s land he draws;
The land affix*d by Fate*s eternal laws
To end his toils. Is then our anger vain?
No; if this sceptre yet commands the main.*

He spoke, and high the forky trident hurl*d,
Rolls clouds on clouds, and stirs the watery world,
At once the face of earth and sea deforms,
Swells all the winds, and rouses all the storms.
Down rushed the night: east, west, together roar;
And south and north roll mountains to the shore.
Then shook the hero, to despair resign*d,
And question*d thus his yet unconquer*d mind;

*Wretch that I am! what farther fates attend
This life of toils, and what my destined end?
Too well, alas! the island goddess knew
On the black sea what perils should ensue.
New horrors now this destined head inclose;
Untill*d is yet the measure of my woes;
With what a cloud the brows of heaven are crown*d;
What raging winds! what roaring waters round!
*Tis Jove himself the swelling tempest rears;
Death, present death, on every side appears.
Happy! thrice happy! who, in battle slain,
Press*d in Atrides* cause the Trojan plain!
Oh! had I died before that well-fought wall!
Had some distinguish*d day renown*d my fall
(Such as was that when showers of javelins fled
From conquering Troy around Achilles dead),
All Greece had paid me solemn funerals then,
And spread my glory with the sons of men.
A shameful fate now hides my hapless head,
Unwept, unnoted, and for ever dead!*

A mighty wave rush*d o*er him as he spoke,
The raft is cover*d, and the mast is broke;
Swept from the deck and from the rudder torn,
Far on the swelling surge the chief was borne;
While by the howling tempest rent in twain
Flew sail and sail-yards rattling o*er the main.
Long-press*d, he heaved beneath the weighty wave,
Clogg*d by the cumbrous vest Calypso gave;
At length, emerging, from his nostrils wide
And gushing mouth effused the briny tide;
E*en then not mindless of his last retreat,
He seized the raft, and leap*d into his seat,
Strong with the fear of death. In rolling flood,
Now here, now there, impell*d the floating wood
As when a heap of gather*d thorns is cast,
Now to, now fro, before the autumnal blast;
Together clung, it rolls around the field;
So roll*d the float, and so its texture held:
And now the south, and now the north, bear sway,
And now the east the foamy floods obey,
And now the west wind whirls it o*er the sea.
The wandering chief with toils on toils oppress*d,
Leucothea saw, and pity touch*d her breast.
(Herself a mortal once, of Cadmus* strain,
But now an azure sister of the main)
Swift as a sea-mew springing from the flood,
All radiant on the raft the goddess stood;
Then thus address*d him: *Thou whom heaven decrees
To Neptune*s wrath, stern tyrant of the seas!
(Unequal contest!) not his rage and power,
Great as he is, such virtue shall devour.
What I suggest, thy wisdom will perform:
Forsake thy float, and leave it to the storm;
Strip off thy garments; Neptune*s fury brave
With naked strength, and plunge into the wave.
To reach Ph*acia all thy nerves extend,
There Fate decrees thy miseries shall end.
This heavenly scarf beneath thy bosom bind,
And live; give all thy terrors to the wind.
Soon as thy arms the happy shore shall gain,
Return the gift, and cast it in the main:
Observe my orders, and with heed obey,
Cast it far off, and turn thy eyes away.*

With that, her hand the sacred veil bestows,
Then down the deeps she dived from whence she rose;
A moment snatch*d the shining form away,
And all was covered with the curling sea.

Struck with amaze, yet still to doubt inclined,
He stands suspended, and explores his mind:
*What shall I do? unhappy me! who knows
But other gods intend me other woes?
Whoe*er thou art, I shall not blindly join
Thy pleaded reason, but consult with mine:
For scarce in ken appears that distant isle
Thy voice foretells me shall conclude my toil.
Thus then I judge: while yet the planks sustain
The wild waves* fury, here I fix*d remain:
But, when their texture to the tempest yields,
I launch adventurous on the liquid fields,
Join to the help of gods the strength of man,
And take this method, since the best I can.*

While thus his thoughts an anxious council hold,
The raging god a watery mountain roll*d;
Like a black sheet the whelming billows spread,
Burst o*er the float, and thunder*d on his head.
Planks, beams, disparted fly; the scatter*d wood
Rolls diverse, and in fragments strews the flood.
So the rude Boreas, o*er the field new-shorn,
Tosses and drives the scatter*d heaps of corn.
And now a single beam the chief bestrides:
There poised a while above the bounding tides,
His limbs discumbers of the clinging vest,
And binds the sacred cincture round his breast:
Then prone an ocean in a moment flung,
Stretch*d wide his eager arms, and shot the seas along.
All naked now, on heaving billows laid,
Stern Neptune eyed him, and contemptuous said:

*Go, learn*d in woes, and other foes essay!
Go, wander helpless on the watery way;
Thus, thus find out the destined shore, and then
(If Jove ordains it) mix with happier men.
Whate*er thy fate, the ills our wrath could raise
Shall last remember*d in thy best of days.*

This said, his sea-green steeds divide the foam,
And reach high *g* and the towery dome.
Now, scarce withdrawn the fierce earth-shaking power,
Jove*s daughter Pallas watch*d the favouring hour.
Back to their caves she bade the winds to fly;
And hush*d the blustering brethren of the sky.
The drier blasts alone of Boreas away,
And bear him soft on broken waves away;
With gentle force impelling to that shore,
Where fate has destined he shall toil no more.
And now, two nights, and now two days were pass*d,
Since wide he wander*d on the watery waste;
Heaved on the surge with intermitting breath,
And hourly panting in the arms of death.
The third fair morn now blazed upon the main;
Then glassy smooth lay all the liquid plain;
The winds were hush*d, the billows scarcely curl*d,
And a dead silence still*d the watery world;
When lifted on a ridgy wave he spies
The land at distance, and with sharpen*d eyes.
As pious children joy with vast delight
When a loved sire revives before their sight
(Who, lingering long, has call*d on death in vain,
Fix*d by some demon to his bed of pain,
Till heaven by miracle his life restore);
So joys Ulysses at the appearing shore;
And sees (and labours onward as he sees)
The rising forests, and the tufted trees.
And now, as near approaching as the sound
Of human voice the listening ear may wound,
Amidst the rocks he heard a hollow roar
Of murmuring surges breaking on the shore;
Nor peaceful port was there, nor winding bay,
To shield the vessel from the rolling sea,
But cliffs and shaggy shores, a dreadful sight!
All rough with rocks, with foamy billows white.
Fear seized his slacken*d limbs and beating heart,
As thus he communed with his soul apart;

*Ah me! when, o*er a length of waters toss*d,
These eyes at last behold the unhoped-for coast,
No port receives me from the angry main,
But the loud deeps demand me back again.
Above, sharp rocks forbid access; around
Roar the wild waves; beneath, is sea profound!
No footing sure affords the faithless sand,
To stem too rapid, and too deep to stand.
If here I enter, my efforts are vain,
Dash*d on the cliffs, or heaved into the main;
Or round the island if my course I bend,
Where the ports open, or the shores descend,
Back to the seas the rolling surge may sweep,
And bury all my hopes beneath the deep.
Or some enormous whale the god may send
(For many such an Amphitrite attend);
Too well the turns of mortal chance I know,
And hate relentless of my heavenly foe.*
While thus he thought, a monstrous wave upbore
The chief, and dash*d him on the craggy shore;
Torn was his skin, nor had the ribs been whole,
But Instant Pallas enter*d in his soul.
Close to the cliff with both his hands he clung,
And stuck adherent, and suspended hung;
Till the huge surge roll*d off; then backward sweep
The refluent tides, and plunge him in the deep.
As when the polypus, from forth his cave
Torn with full force, reluctant beats the wave,
His ragged claws are stuck with stones and sands;
So the rough rock had shagg*d Ulysses hands,
And now had perish*d, whelm*d beneath the main,
The unhappy man; e*en fate had been in vain;
But all-subduing Pallas lent her power,
And prudence saved him in the needful hour.
Beyond the beating surge his course he bore,
(A wider circle, but in sight of shore),
With longing eyes, observing, to survey
Some smooth ascent, or safe sequester*d bay.
Between the parting rocks at length he spied
A failing stream with gentler waters glide;
Where to the seas the shelving shore declined,
And form*d a bay impervious to the wind.
To this calm port the glad Ulysses press*d,
And hail*d the river, and its god address*d:

*Whoe*er thou art, before whose stream unknown
I bend, a suppliant at thy watery throne,
Hear, azure king! nor let me fly in vain
To thee from Neptune and the raging main
Heaven hears and pities hapless men like me,
For sacred even to gods is misery:
Let then thy waters give the weary rest,
And save a suppliant, and a man distress*d.*

He pray*d, and straight the gentle stream subsides,
Detains the rushing current of his tides,
Before the wanderer smooths the watery way,
And soft receives him from the rolling sea.
That moment, fainting as he touch*d the shore,
He dropp*d his sinewy arms: his knees no more
Perform*d their office, or his weight upheld:
His swoln heart heaved; his bloated body swell*d:
From mouth and nose the briny torrent ran;
And lost in lassitude lay all the man,
Deprived of voice, of motion, and of breath;
The soul scarce waking in the arms of death.
Soon as warm life its wonted office found,
The mindful chief Leucothea*s scarf unbound;
Observant of her word, he turn*d aside
His head, and cast it on the rolling tide.
Behind him far, upon the purple waves,
The waters waft it, and the nymph receives.

Now parting from the stream, Ulysses found
A mossy bank with pliant rushes crown*d;
The bank he press*d, and gently kiss*d the ground;
Where on the flowery herb as soft he lay,
Thus to his soul the sage began to say:

*What will ye next ordain, ye powers on high!
And yet, ah yet, what fates are we to try?
Here by the stream, if I the night out-wear,
Thus spent already, how shall nature bear
The dews descending, and nocturnal air;
Or chilly vapours breathing from the flood
When morning rises?*If I take the wood,
And in thick shelter of innumerous boughs
Enjoy the comfort gentle sleep allows;
Though fenced from cold, and though my toil be pass*d,
What savage beasts may wander in the waste?
Perhaps I yet may fall a bloody prey
To prowling bears, or lions in the way.*

Thus long debating in himself he stood:
At length he took the passage to the wood,
Whose shady horrors on a rising brow
Waved high, and frown*d upon the stream below.
There grew two olives, closest of the grove,
With roots entwined, the branches interwove;
Alike their leaves, but not alike they smiled
With sister-fruits; one fertile, one was wild.
Nor here the sun*s meridian rays had power,
Nor wind sharp-piercing, nor the rushing shower;
The verdant arch so close its texture kept:
Beneath this covert great Ulysses crept.
Of gather*d leaves an ample bed he made
(Thick strewn by tempest through the bowery shade);
Where three at least might winter*s cold defy,
Though Boreas raged along the inclement sky.
This store with joy the patient hero found,
And, sunk amidst them, heap*d the leaves around.
As some poor peasant, fated to reside
Remote from neighbours in a forest wide,
Studious to save what human wants require,
In embers heap*d, preserves the seeds of fire:
Hid in dry foliage thus Ulysses lies,
Till Pallas pour*d soft slumbers on his eyes;
And golden dreams (the gift of sweet repose)
Lull*d all his cares, and banish*d all his woes.




BOOK VI.


ARGUMENT.


Pallas appearing in a dream in to Nausicaa (the daughter of Alcinous,
king of Ph*acia, commands her to descend to the river, and wash the
robes of state, in preparation for her nuptials. Nausicaa goes with her
handmaidens to the river; where, while the garments are spread on the
bank, they divert themselves in sports. Their voices awaken Ulysses,
who, addressing himself to the princess, is by her relieved and
clothed, and receives directions in what manner to apply to the king
and queen of the island.


While thus the weary wanderer sunk to rest,
And peaceful slumbers calmed his anxious breast,
The martial maid from heaven*s a*rial height
Swift to Ph*acia wing*d her rapid flight.
In elder times the soft Ph*acian train
In ease possess*d the wide Hyperian plain;
Till the Cyclopean race in arms arose,
A lawless nation of gigantic foes;
Then great Nausithous from Hyperia far,
Through seas retreating from the sounds of war,
The recreant nation to fair Scheria led,
Where never science rear*d her laurell*d head;
There round his tribes a strength of wall he raised;
To heaven the glittering domes and temples blazed;
Just to his realms, he parted grounds from grounds,
And shared the lands, and gave the lands their bounds.
Now in the silent grave the monarch lay,
And wise Alcinous held the legal sway.

To his high palace through the fields of air
The goddess shot; Ulysses was her care.
There, as the night in silence roll*d away,
A heaven of charms divine Nausicaa lay:
Through the thick gloom the shining portals blaze;
Two nymphs the portals guard, each nymph a Grace,
Light as the viewless air the warrior maid
Glides through the valves, and hovers round her head;
A favourite virgin*s blooming form she took,
From Dymas sprung, and thus the vision spoke:

*Oh Indolent! to waste thy hours away!
And sleep*st thou careless of the bridal day!
Thy spousal ornament neglected lies;
Arise, prepare the bridal train, arise!
A just applause the cares of dress impart,
And give soft transport to a parent*s heart.
Haste, to the limpid stream direct thy way,
When the gay morn unveils her smiling ray;
Haste to the stream! companion of thy care,
Lo, I thy steps attend, thy labours share.
Virgin, awake! the marriage hour is nigh,
See from their thrones thy kindred monarchs sigh!
The royal car at early dawn obtain,
And order mules obedient to the rein;
For rough the way, and distant rolls the wave,
Where their fair vests Ph*acian virgins lave,
In pomp ride forth; for pomp becomes the great
And majesty derives a grace from state.*
Then to the palaces of heaven she sails,
Incumbent on the wings of wafting gales;
The seat of gods; the regions mild of peace,
Full joy, and calm eternity of ease.
There no rude winds presume to shake the skies,
No rains descend, no snowy vapours rise;
But on immortal thrones the blest repose;
The firmament with living splendours glows.
Hither the goddess winged the a*rial way,
Through heaven*s eternal gates that blazed with day.

Now from her rosy car Aurora shed
The dawn, and all the orient flamed with red.
Up rose the virgin with the morning light,
Obedient to the vision of the night.
The queen she sought, the queen her hours bestowed
In curious works; the whirling spindle glow*d
With crimson threads, while busy damsels call
The snowy fleece, or twist the purpled wool.
Meanwhile Ph*acia*s peers in council sate;
From his high dome the king descends in state;
Then with a filial awe the royal maid
Approach*d him passing, and submissive said:

*Will my dread sire his ear regardful deign,
And may his child the royal car obtain?
Say, with my garments shall I bend my way?
Where through the vales the mazy waters stray?
A dignity of dress adorns the great,
And kings draw lustre from the robe of state.
Five sons thou hast; three wait the bridal day.
And spotless robes become the young and gay;
So when with praise amid the dance they shine,
By these my cares adorn*d that praise is mine.*

Thus she: but blushes ill-restrain*d betray
Her thoughts intentive on the bridal day,
The conscious sire the dawning blush survey*d,
And, smiling, thus bespoke the blooming maid
*My child, my darling joy, the car receive;
That, and whate*er our daughter asks, we give.*
Swift at the royal nod the attending train
The car prepare, the mules incessant rein,
The blooming virgin with despatchful cares
Tunics, and stoles, and robes imperial, bears.
The queen, assiduous to her train assigns
The sumptuous viands, and the flavorous wines.
The train prepare a cruse of curious mould,
A cruse of fragrance, form*d of burnish*d gold;
Odour divine! whose soft refreshing streams
Sleek the smooth skin, and scent the snowy limbs.

Now mounting the gay seat, the silken reins
Shine in her hand; along the sounding plains
Swift fly the mules; nor rode the nymph alone;
Around, a bevy of bright damsels shone.
They seek the cisterns where Ph*acian dames
Wash their fair garments in the limpid streams;
Where, gathering into depth from falling rills,
The lucid wave a spacious bason fills.
The mules, unharness*d, range beside the main,
Or crop the verdant herbage of the plain.

Then emulous the royal robes they lave,
And plunge the vestures in the cleansing wave
(The vestures cleansed o*erspread the shelly sand,
Their snowy lustre whitens all the strand);
Then with a short repast relieve their toil,
And o*er their limbs diffuse ambrosial oil;
And while the robes imbibe the solar ray,
O*er the green mead the sporting virgins play
(Their shining veils unbound). Along the skies,
Toss*d and retoss*d, the ball incessant flies.
They sport, they feast; Nausicaa lifts her voice,
And, warbling sweet, makes earth and heaven rejoice.

As when o*er Erymanth Diana roves,
Or wide T*ygetus* resounding groves;
A sylvan train the huntress queen surrounds,
Her rattling quiver from her shoulders sounds:
Fierce in the sport, along the mountain*s brow
They bay the boar, or chase the bounding roe;
High o*er the lawn, with more majestic pace,
Above the nymphs she treads with stately grace;
Distinguish*d excellence the goddess proves;
Exults Latona as the virgin moves.
With equal grace Nausicaa trod the plain,
And shone transcendent o*er the beauteous train.

Meantime (the care and favourite of the skies
Wrapp*d in imbowering shade, Ulysses lies,
His woes forgot! but Pallas now address*d
To break the bands of all-composing rest.
Forth from her snowy hand Nausicaa threw
The various ball; the ball erroneous flew
And swam the stream; loud shrieks the virgin train,
And the loud shriek redoubles from the main.
Waked by the shrilling sound, Ulysses rose,
And, to the deaf woods wailing, breathed his woes:

*Ah me! on what inhospitable coast,
On what new region is Ulysses toss*d;
Possess*d by wild barbarians fierce in arms;
Or men, whose bosom tender pity warms?
What sounds are these that gather from he shores?
The voice of nymphs that haunt the sylvan bowers,
The fair-hair*d Dryads of the shady wood;
Or azure daughters of the silver flood;
Or human voice? but issuing from the shades,
Why cease I straight to learn what sound invades?*

Then, where the grove with leaves umbrageous bends,
With forceful strength a branch the hero rends;
Around his loins the verdant cincture spreads
A wreathy foliage and concealing shades.
As when a lion in the midnight hours,
Beat by rude blasts, and wet with wintry showers,
Descends terrific from the mountains brow;
With living flames his rolling eye balls glow;
With conscious strength elate, he bends his way,
Majestically fierce, to seize his prey
(The steer or stag;) or, with keen hunger bold,
Spring o*er the fence and dissipates the fold.
No less a terror, from the neighbouring groves
(Rough from the tossing surge) Ulysses moves;
Urged on by want, and recent from the storms;
The brackish ooze his manly grace deforms.
Wide o*er the shore with many a piercing cry
To rocks, to caves, the frightened virgins fly;
All but the nymph; the nymph stood fix*d alone,
By Pallas arm*d with boldness not her own.
Meantime in dubious thought the king awaits,
And, self-considering, as he stands, debates;
Distant his mournful story to declare,
Or prostrate at her knee address the prayer.
But fearful to offend, by wisdom sway*d,
At awful distance he accosts the maid:

*If from the skies a goddess, or if earth
(Imperial virgin) boast thy glorious birth,
To thee I bend! If in that bright disguise
Thou visit earth, a daughter of the skies,
Hail, Dian, hail! the huntress of the groves
So shines majestic, and so stately moves,
So breathes an air divine! But if thy race
Be mortal, and this earth thy native place,
Blest is the father from whose loins you sprung,
Blest is the mother at whose breast you hung.
Blest are the brethren who thy blood divide,
To such a miracle of charms allied:
Joyful they see applauding princes gaze,
When stately in the dance you swim the harmonious maze.
But blest o*er all, the youth with heavenly charms,
Who clasps the bright perfection in his arms!
Never, I never view*d till this blest hour
Such finish*d grace! I gaze, and I adore!
Thus seems the palm with stately honours crown*d
By Ph*bus* altars; thus o*erlooks the ground;
The pride of Delos. (By the Delian coast,
I voyaged, leader of a warrior-host,
But ah, how changed! from thence my sorrow flows;
O fatal voyage, source of all my woes;)
Raptured I stood, and as this hour amazed,
With reverence at the lofty wonder gazed:
Raptured I stand! for earth ne*er knew to bear
A plant so stately, or a nymph so fair.
Awed from access, I lift my suppliant hands;
For Misery, O queen! before thee stands.
Twice ten tempestuous nights I roll*d, resign*d
To roaring billows, and the warring wind;
Heaven bade the deep to spare; but heaven, my foe,
Spares only to inflict some mightier woe.
Inured to cares, to death in all its forms;
Outcast I rove, familiar with the storms.
Once more I view the face of human kind:
Oh let soft pity touch thy generous mind!
Unconscious of what air I breathe, I stand
Naked, defenceless on a narrow land.
Propitious to my wants a vest supply
To guard the wretched from the inclement sky:
So may the gods, who heaven and earth control,
Crown the chaste wishes of thy virtuous soul,
On thy soft hours their choicest blessings shed;
Blest with a husband be thy bridal bed;
Blest be thy husband with a blooming race,
And lasting union crown your blissful days.
The gods, when they supremely bless, bestow
Firm union on their favourites below;
Then envy grieves, with inly-pining hate;
The good exult, and heaven is in our state.*

To whom the nymph: *O stranger, cease thy care;
Wise is thy soul, but man is born to bear;
Jove weighs affairs of earth in dubious scales,
And the good suffers, while the bad prevails.
Bear, with a soul resign*d, the will of Jove;
Who breathes, must mourn: thy woes are from above.
But since thou tread*st our hospitable shore,
*Tis mine to bid the wretched grieve no more,
To clothe the naked, and thy way to guide.
Know, the Ph*acian tribes this land divide;
From great Alcinous* royal loins I spring,
A happy nation, and a happy king.*

Then to her maids: *Why, why, ye coward train,
These fears, this flight? ye fear, and fly in vain.
Dread ye a foe? dismiss that idle dread,
*Tis death with hostile step these shores to tread;
Safe in the love of heaven, an ocean flows
Around our realm, a barrier from the foes;
*Tis ours this son of sorrow to relieve,
Cheer the sad heart, nor let affliction grieve.
By Jove the stranger and the poor are sent;
And what to those we give to Jove is lent.
Then food supply, and bathe his fainting limbs
Where waving shades obscure the mazy streams.*

Obedient to the call, the chief they guide
To the calm current of the secret tide;
Close by the stream a royal dress they lay,
A vest and robe, with rich embroidery gay;
Then unguents in a vase of gold supply,
That breathed a fragrance through the balmy sky.

To them the king: *No longer I detain
Your friendly care: retire, ye virgin train!
Retire, while from my wearied limbs I lave
The foul pollution of the briny wave.
Ye gods! since this worn frame refection knew,
What scenes have I surveyed of dreadful view!
But, nymphs, recede! sage chastity denies
To raise the blush, or pain the modest eyes.*

The nymphs withdrawn, at once into the tide
Active he bounds; the flashing waves divide
O*er all his limbs his hands the waves diffuse,
And from his locks compress the weedy ooze;
The balmy oil, a fragrant shower, be sheds;
Then, dressed, in pomp magnificently treads.
The warrior-goddess gives his frame to shine
With majesty enlarged, and air divine:
Back from his brows a length of hair unfurls,
His hyacinthine locks descend in wavy curls.
As by some artist, to whom Vulcan gives
His skill divine, a breathing statue lives;
By Pallas taught, he frames the wondrous mould,
And o*er the silver pours the fusile gold
So Pallas his heroic frame improves
With heavenly bloom, and like a god he moves.
A fragrance breathes around; majestic grace
Attends his steps: the astonished virgins gaze.
Soft he reclines along the murmuring seas,
Inhaling freshness from the fanning breeze.

The wondering nymph his glorious port survey*d,
And to her damsels, with amazement, said:

*Not without care divine the stranger treads
This land of joy; his steps some godhead leads:
Would Jove destroy him, sure he had been driven
Far from this realm, the favourite isle of heaven.
Late, a sad spectacle of woe, he trod
The desert sands, and now he looks a god.
Oh heaven! in my connubial hour decree
This man my spouse, or such a spouse as he!
But haste, the viands and the bowl provide.*
The maids the viands and the bowl supplied:
Eager he fed, for keen his hunger raged,
And with the generous vintage thirst assuaged.

Now on return her care Nausicaa bends,
The robes resumes, the glittering car ascends,
Far blooming o*er the field; and as she press*d
The splendid seat, the listening chief address*d:

*Stranger, arise! the sun rolls down the day.
Lo, to the palace I direct thy way;
Where, in high state, the nobles of the land
Attend my royal sire, a radiant band
But hear, though wisdom in thy soul presides,
Speaks from thy tongue, and every action guides;
Advance at distance, while I pass the plain
Where o*er the furrows waves the golden grain;
Alone I reascend*With airy mounds
A strength of wall the guarded city bounds;
The jutting land two ample bays divides:
Full through the narrow mouths descend the tides;
The spacious basons arching rocks enclose,
A sure defence from every storm that blows.
Close to the bay great Neptune*s fane adjoins;
And near, a forum flank*d with marble shines,
Where the bold youth, the numerous fleets to store,
Shape the broad sail, or smooth the taper oar:
For not the bow they bend, nor boast the skill
To give the feather*d arrow wings to kill;
But the tall mast above the vessel rear,
Or teach the fluttering sail to float in air.
They rush into the deep with eager joy,
Climb the steep surge, and through the tempest fly;
A proud, unpolish*d race*To me belongs
The care to shun the blast of slanderous tongues;
Lest malice, prone the virtuous to defame,
Thus with wild censure taint my spotless name:
*What stranger this whom thus Nausicaa leads!
Heavens, with what graceful majesty he treads!
Perhaps a native of some distant shore,
The future consort of her bridal hour:
Or rather some descendant of the skies;
Won by her prayer, the a*rial bridegroom flies,
Heaven on that hour its choicest influence shed,
That gave a foreign spouse to crown her bed!
All, all the godlike worthies that adorn
This realm, she flies: Ph*acia is her scorn.*
And just the blame: for female innocence
Not only flies the guilt, but shuns the offence:
The unguarded virgin, as unchaste, I blame;
And the least freedom with the sex is shame,
Till our consenting sires a spouse provide,
And public nuptials justify the bride,
But would*st thou soon review thy native plain?
Attend, and speedy thou shalt pass the main:
Nigh where a grove with verdant poplars crown*d,
To Pallas sacred, shades the holy ground,
We bend our way; a bubbling fount distills
A lucid lake, and thence descends in rills;
Around the grove, a mead with lively green
Falls by degrees, and forms a beauteous scene;
Here a rich juice the royal vineyard pours;
And there the garden yields a waste of flowers.
Hence lies the town, as far as to the ear
Floats a strong shout along the waves of air.
There wait embower*d, while I ascend alone
To great Alcinous on his royal throne.
Arrived, advance, impatient of delay,
And to the lofty palace bend thy way:
The lofty palace overlooks the town,
From every dome by pomp superior known;
A child may point the way. With earnest gait
Seek thou the queen along the rooms of state;
Her royal hand a wondrous work designs,
Around a circle of bright damsels shines;
Part twist the threads, and part the wool dispose,
While with the purple orb the spindle glows.
High on a throne, amid the Scherian powers,
My royal father shares the genial hours:
But to the queen thy mournful tale disclose,
With the prevailing eloquence of woes:
So shalt thou view with joy thy natal shore,
Though mountains rise between and oceans roar.*

She added not, but waving, as she wheel*d,
The silver scourge, it glitter*d o*er the field;
With skill the virgin guides the embroider*d rein,
Slow rolls the car before the attending train,
Now whirling down the heavens, the golden day
Shot through the western clouds a dewy ray;
The grove they reach, where, from the sacred shade,
To Pallas thus the pensive hero pray*d:

*Daughter of Jove! whose arms in thunder wield
The avenging bolt, and shake the dreadful shield;
Forsook by thee, in vain I sought thy aid
When booming billows closed above my bead;
Attend, unconquer*d maid! accord my vows,
Bid the Great hear, and pitying, heal my woes.*

This heard Minerva, but forbore to fly
(By Neptune awed) apparent from the sky;
Stern god! who raged with vengeance, unrestrain*d.
Till great Ulysses hail*d his native land.




BOOK VII.


ARGUMENT.
THE COURT OF ALCINOUS.


The princess Nausicaa returns to the city and Ulysses soon after
follows thither. He is met by Pallas in the form of a young virgin, who
guides him to the palace, and directs him in what manner to address the
queen Arete. She then involves him in a mist which causes him to pass
invisible. The palace and gardens of Alcinous described. Ulysses
falling at the feet of the queen, the mist disperses, the Ph*acians
admire, and receive him with respect. The queen inquiring by what means
he had the garments he then wore, be relates to her and Alcinous his
departure from Calypso, and his arrival in their dominions.
    The same day continues, and the book ends with the night.


The patient heavenly man thus suppliant pray*d;
While the slow mules draws on the imperial maid;
Through the proud street she moves, the public gaze;
The turning wheel before the palace stays.
With ready love her brothers, gathering round,
Received the vestures, and the mules unbound.
She seeks the bridal bower: a matron there
The rising fire supplies with busy care,
Whose charms in youth her father*s heart inflamed,
Now worn with age, Eurymedusa named;
The captive dame Ph*acian rovers bore,
Snatch*d from Epirus, her sweet native shore
(A grateful prize), and in her bloom bestow*d
On good Alcinous, honor*d as a god;
Nurse of Nausicaa from her infant years,
And tender second to a mother*s cares.

Now from the sacred thicket where he lay,
To town Ulysses took the winding way.
Propitious Pallas, to secure her care,
Around him spread a veil of thicken*d air;
To shun the encounter of the vulgar crowd,
Insulting still, inquisitive and loud.
When near the famed Ph*acian walls he drew,
The beauteous city opening to his view,
His step a virgin met, and stood before:
A polish*d urn the seeming virgin bore,
And youthful smiled; but in the low disguise
Lay hid the goddess with the azure eyes.

*Show me, fair daughter (thus the chief demands),
The house of him who rules these happy lands
Through many woes and wanderings, do I come
To good Alcinous* hospitable dome.
Far from my native coast, I rove alone,
A wretched stranger, and of all unknown!*

The goddess answer*d: *Father, I obey,
And point the wandering traveller his way:
Well known to me the palace you inquire,
For fast beside it dwells my honour*d sire:
But silent march, nor greet the common train
With question needless, or inquiry vain;
A race of ragged mariners are these,
Unpolish*d men, and boisterous as their seas
The native islanders alone their care,
And hateful he who breathes a foreign air.
These did the ruler of the deep ordain
To build proud navies, and command the main;
On canvas wings to cut the watery way;
No bird so light, no thought so swift as they.*

Thus having spoke, the unknown celestial leads:
The footsteps of the deity he treads,
And secret moves along the crowded space,
Unseen of all the rude Ph*acian race.
(So Pallas order*d, Pallas to their eyes
The mist objected, and condensed the skies.)
The chief with wonder sees the extended streets,
The spreading harbours, and the riding fleets;
He next their princes* lofty domes admires,
In separate islands, crown*d with rising spires;
And deep entrenchments, and high walls of stone.
That gird the city like a marble zone.
At length the kingly palace-gates he view*d;
There stopp*d the goddess, and her speech renew*d;

*My task is done: the mansion you inquire
Appears before you: enter, and admire.
High-throned, and feasting, there thou shalt behold
The sceptred rulers. Fear not, but be bold:
A decent boldness ever meets with friends,
Succeeds, and even a stranger recommends
First to the queen prefer a suppliant*s claim,
Alcinous* queen, Arete is her name.
The same her parents, and her power the same.
For know, from ocean*s god Nausithous sprung,
And Perib*a, beautiful and young
(Eurymedon*s last hope, who ruled of old
The race of giants, impious, proud, and bold:
Perish*d the nation in unrighteous war,
Perish*d the prince, and left this only heir),
Who now, by Neptune*s amorous power compress*d,
Produced a monarch that his people bless*d,
Father and prince of the Ph*acian name;
From him Rhexenor and Alcinous came.
The first by Ph*bus* hurtling arrows fired,
New from his nuptials, hapless youth! expired.
No son survived; Arete heir*d his state,
And her, Alcinous chose his royal mate.
With honours yet to womankind unknown.
This queen he graces, and divides the throne;
In equal tenderness her sons conspire,
And all the children emulate their sire.
When through the streets she gracious deigns to move
(The public wonder and the public love),
The tongues of all with transport sound her praise,
The eyes of all, as on a goddess, gaze.
She feels the triumph of a generous breast;
To heal divisions, to relieve the oppress*d;
In virtue rich; in blessing others, bless*d.
(to then secure, thy humble suit prefer
And owe thy country and thy friends to her.*

With that the goddess deign*d no longer stay,
But o*er the world of waters wing*d her way;
Forsaking Scheria*s ever-pleasing shore,
The winds to Marathon the virgin bore:
Thence, where proud Athens rears her towery head,
With opening streets and shining structures spread,
She pass*d, delighted with the well-known seats;
And to Erectheus* sacred dome retreats.

Meanwhile Ulysses at the palace waits,
There stops, and anxious with his soul debates,
Fix*d in amaze before the royal gates.
The front appear*d with radiant splendours gay,
Bright as the lamp of night, or orb of day,
The walls were massy brass: the cornice high
Blue metals crown*d in colours of the sky,
Rich plates of gold the folding doors incase;
The pillars silver, on a brazen base;
Silver the lintels deep-projecting o*er,
And gold the ringlets that command the door.
Two rows of stately dogs, on either hand,
In sculptured gold and labour*d silver stood
These Vulcan form*d with art divine, to wait
Immortal guardians at Alcinous* gate;
Alive each animated frame appears,
And still to live beyond the power of years,
Fair thrones within from space to space were raised,
Where various carpets with embroidery blessed,
The work of matrons: these the princes press*d,
Day following day, a long-continued feast.
Refulgent pedestals the walls surround,
Which boys of gold with flaming torches crown*d;
The polish*d ore, reflecting every ray,
Blazed on the banquets with a double day.
Full fifty handmaids form the household train;
Some turn the mill, or sift the golden grain;
Some ply the loom; their busy fingers move
Like poplar-leaves when Zephyr fans the grove.
Not more renown*d the men of Scheria*s isle
For sailing arts and all the naval toil,
Than works of female skill their women*s pride,
The flying shuttle through the threads to guide:
Pallas to these her double gifts imparts,
Incentive genius, and industrious arts.

Close to the gates a spacious garden lies,
From storms defended and inclement skies.
Four acres was the allotted space of ground,
Fenced with a green enclosure all around.
Tall thriving trees confess*d the fruitful mould:
The reddening apple ripens here to gold.
Here the blue fig with luscious juice o*erflows,
With deeper red the full pomegranate glows;
The branch here bends beneath the weighty pear,
And verdant olives flourish round the year,
The balmy spirit of the western gale
Eternal breathes on fruits, unthought to fail:
Each dropping pear a following pear supplies,
On apples apples, figs on figs arise:
The same mild season gives the blooms to blow,
The buds to harden, and the fruits to grow.

Here order*d vines in equal ranks appear,
With all the united labours of the year;
Some to unload the fertile branches run,
Some dry the blackening clusters in the sun,
Others to tread the liquid harvest join:
The groaning presses foam with floods of wine
Here are the vines in early flower descried,
Here grapes discolour*d on the sunnyside,
And there in autumn*s richest purple dyed,

Beds of all various herbs, for ever green,
In beauteous order terminate the scene.

Two plenteous fountains the whole prospect crown*d
This through the gardens leads its streams around
Visits each plant, and waters all the ground;
While that in pipes beneath the palace flows,
And thence its current on the town bestows:
To various use their various streams they bring,
The people one, and one supplies the king.

Such were the glories which the gods ordain*d,
To grace Alcinous, and his happy land.
E*en from the chief whom men and nations knew,
The unwonted scene surprise and rapture drew;
In pleasing thought he ran the prospect o*er,
Then hasty enter*d at the lofty door.
Night now approaching, in the palace stand,
With goblets crown*d, the rulers of the land;
Prepared for rest, and offering to the god
Who bears the virtue of the sleepy rod,
Unseen he glided through the joyous crowd,
With darkness circled, and an ambient cloud.
Direct to great Alcinous* throne he came,
And prostrate fell before the imperial dame.
Then from around him dropp*d the veil of night;
Sudden he shines, and manifest to sight.
The nobles gaze, with awful fear oppress*d;
Silent they gaze, and eye the godlike guest.

*Daughter of great Rhexenor! (thus began,
Low at her knees, the much-enduring man)
To thee, thy consort, and this royal train,
To all that share the blessings of your reign,
A suppliant bends: oh pity human woe!
*Tis what the happy to the unhappy owe.
A wretched exile to his country send,
Long worn with griefs, and long without a friend
So may the gods your better days increase,
And all your joys descend on all your race;
So reign for ever on your country*s breast,
Your people blessing, by your people bless*d!*

Then to the genial hearth he bow*d his face,
And humbled in the ashes took his place.
Silence ensued. The eldest first began,
Echeneus sage, a venerable man!
Whose well-taught mind the present age surpass*d,
And join*d to that the experience of the last.
Fit words attended on his weighty sense,
And mild persuasion flow*d in eloquence.

*Oh sight (he cried) dishonest and unjust!
A guest, a stranger, seated in the dust!
To raise the lowly suppliant from the ground
Befits a monarch. Lo! the peers around
But wait thy word, the gentle guest to grace,
And seat him fair in some distinguish*d place.
Let first the herald due libation pay
To Jove, who guides the wanderer on his way:
Then set the genial banquet in his view,
And give the stranger-guest a stranger*s due.*

His sage advice the listening king obeys,
He stretch*d his hand the prudent chief to raise,
And from his seat Laodamas removed
(The monarch*s offspring, and his best-beloved);
There next his side the godlike hero sate;
With stars of silver shone the bed of state.
The golden ewer a beauteous handmaid brings,
Replenish*d from the cool translucent springs,
Whose polish*d vase with copious streams supplies
A silver layer of capacious size.
The table next in regal order spread,
The glittering canisters are heap*d with bread:
Viands of various kinds invite the taste,
Of choicest sort and savour, rich repast!
Thus feasting high, Alcinous gave the sign,
And bade the herald pour the rosy wine;
*Let all around the due libation pay
To Jove, who guides the wanderer on his way.*

He said. Pontonous heard the king*s command;
The circling goblet moves from hand to hand;
Each drinks the juice that glads the heart of man.
Alcinous then, with aspect mild, began:

*Princes and peers, attend; while we impart
To you the thoughts of no inhuman heart.
Now pleased and satiate from the social rite
Repair we to the blessings of the night;
But with the rising day, assembled here,
Let all the elders of the land appear,
Pious observe our hospitable laws,
And Heaven propitiate in the stranger*s cause;
Then join*d in council, proper means explore
Safe to transport him to the wished-for shore
(How distant that, imports us not to know,
Nor weigh the labour, but relieve the woe).
Meantime, nor harm nor anguish let him bear
This interval, Heaven trusts him to our care
But to his native land our charge resign*d,
Heaven*s is his life to come, and all the woes behind.
Then must he suffer what the Fates ordain;
For Fate has wove the thread of life with pain!
And twins, e*en from the birth, are Misery and Man!
But if, descended from the Olympian bower,
Gracious approach us some immortal power;
If in that form thou comest a guest divine:
Some high event the conscious gods design.
As yet, unbid they never graced our feast,
The solemn sacrifice call*d down the guest;
Then manifest of Heaven the vision stood,
And to our eyes familiar was the god.
Oft with some favour*d traveller they stray,
And shine before him all the desert way;
With social intercourse, and face to face,
The friends and guardians of our pious race.
So near approach we their celestial kind,
By justice, truth, and probity of mind;
As our dire neighbours of Cyclopean birth
Match in fierce wrong the giant-sons of earth.*

*Let no such thought (with modest grace rejoin*d
The prudent Greek) possess the royal mind.
Alas! a mortal, like thyself, am I;
No glorious native of yon azure sky:
In form, ah how unlike their heavenly kind!
How more inferior in the gifts of mind!
Alas, a mortal! most oppress*d of those
Whom Fate has loaded with a weight of woes;
By a sad train of Miseries alone
Distinguish*d long, and second now to none!
By Heaven*s high will compell*d from shore to shore;
With Heaven*s high will prepared to suffer more.
What histories of toil could I declare!
But still long-wearied nature wants repair;
Spent with fatigue, and shrunk with pining fast,
My craving bowels still require repast.
Howe*er the noble, suffering mind may grieve
Its load of anguish, and disdain to live,
Necessity demands our daily bread;
Hunger is insolent, and will be fed.
But finish, oh ye peers! what you propose,
And let the morrow*s dawn conclude my woes.
Pleased will I suffer all the gods ordain,
To see my soil, my son, my friends again.
That view vouchsafed, let instant death surprise
With ever-during shade these happy eyes!*

The assembled peers with general praise approved
His pleaded reason, and the suit he moved.
Each drinks a full oblivion of his cares,
And to the gifts of balmy sleep repairs,
Ulysses in the regal walls alone
Remain*d: beside him, on a splendid throne,
Divine Arete and Alcinous shone.
The queen, on nearer view, the guest survey*d,
Rob*d in the garments her own hands had made,
Not without wonder seen. Then thus began,
Her words addressing to the godlike man:

*Camest thou hither, wondrous stranger! say,
From lands remote and o*er a length of sea?
Tell, then, whence art thou? whence, that princely air?
And robes like these, so recent and so fair?*

*Hard is the task, O princess! you impose
(Thus sighing spoke the man of many woes),
The long, the mournful series to relate
Of all my sorrows sent by Heaven and Fate!
Yet what you ask, attend. An island lies
Beyond these tracts, and under other skies,
Ogygia named, in Ocean*s watery arms;
Where dwells Calypso, dreadful in her charms!
Remote from gods or men she holds her reign,
Amid the terrors of a rolling main.
Me, only me, the hand of fortune bore,
Unblest! to tread that interdicted shore:
When Jove tremendous in the sable deeps
Launch*d his red lightning at our scattered ships;
Then, all my fleet and all my followers lost.
Sole on a plank on boiling surges toss*d,
Heaven drove my wreck the Ogygian Isle to find,
Full nine days floating to the wave and wind.
Met by the goddess there with open arms,
She bribed my stay with more than human charms;
Nay, promised, vainly promised, to bestow
Immortal life, exempt from age and woe;
But all her blandishments successless prove,
To banish from my breast my country*s love.
I stay reluctant seven continued years,
And water her ambrosial couch with tears,
The eighth she voluntary moves to part,
Or urged by Jove, or her own changeful heart.
A raft was formed to cross the surging sea;
Herself supplied the stores and rich array,
And gave the gales to waft me on my way,
In seventeen days appear*d your pleasing coast,
And woody mountains half in vapours lost.
Joy touched my soul; my soul was joy*d in vain,
For angry Neptune roused the raging main;
The wild winds whistle, and the billows roar;
The splitting raft the furious tempest tore;
And storms vindictive intercept the shore.
Soon as their rage subsides, the seas I brave
With naked force, and shoot along the wave,
To reach this isle; but there my hopes were lost,
The surge impell*d me on a craggy coast.
I chose the safer sea, and chanced to find
A river*s mouth impervious to the wind,
And clear of rocks. I fainted by the flood;
Then took the shelter of the neighbouring wood.
*Twas night, and, covered in the foliage deep,
Jove plunged my senses in the death of sleep.
All night I slept, oblivious of my pain:
Aurora dawned and Ph*bus shined in vain,
Nor, till oblique he sloped his evening ray,
Had Somnus dried the balmy dews away.
Then female voices from the shore I heard:
A maid amidst them, goddess-like appear*d;
To her I sued, she pitied my distress;
Like thee in beauty, nor in virtue less.
Who from such youth could hope considerate care?
In youth and beauty wisdom is but rare!
She gave me life, relieved with just supplies
My wants, and lent these robes that strike your eyes.
This is the truth: and oh, ye powers on high!
Forbid that want should sink me to a lie.*

To this the king: *Our daughter but express*d
Her cares imperfect to our godlike guest.
Suppliant to her, since first he chose to pray,
Why not herself did she conduct the way,
And with her handmaids to our court convey?*

*Hero and king (Ulysses thus replied)
Nor blame her faultless nor suspect of pride:
She bade me follow in the attendant train;
But fear and reverence did my steps detain,
Lest rash suspicion might alarm thy mind:
Man*s of a jealous and mistaken kind.*

*Far from my soul (he cried) the gods efface
All wrath ill-grounded, and suspicion base!
Whate*er is honest, stranger, I approve,
And would to Ph*bus, Pallas, and to Jove,
Such as thou art, thy thought and mine were one,
Nor thou unwilling to be called my son.
In such alliance couldst thou wish to join,
A palace stored with treasures should be thine.
But if reluctant, who shall force thy stay?
Jove bids to set the stranger on his way,
And ships shall wait thee with the morning ray.
Till then, let slumber cross thy careful eyes:
The wakeful mariners shall watch the skies,
And seize the moment when the breezes rise:
Then gently waft thee to the pleasing shore,
Where thy soul rests, and labour is no more.
Far as Euboea though thy country lay,
Our ships with ease transport thee in a day.
Thither of old, earth*s giant son to view,
On wings of wind with Rhadamanth they flew;
This land, from whence their morning course begun,
Saw them returning with the setting sun.
Your eyes shall witness and confirm my tale,
Our youth how dexterous, and how fleet our sail,
When justly timed with equal sweep they row,
And ocean whitens in long tracks below.*

Thus he. No word the experienced man replies,
But thus to heaven (and heavenward lifts his eyes):
*O Jove! O father! what the king accords
Do thou make perfect! sacred be his words!
Wide o*er the world Alcinous* glory shine!
Let fame be his, and ah! my country mine!*

Meantime Arete, for the hour of rest,
Ordains the fleecy couch, and covering vest;
Bids her fair train the purple quilts prepare,
And the thick carpets spread with busy care.
With torches blazing in their hands they pass*d,
And finish*d all their queen*s command with haste:
Then gave the signal to the willing guest:
He rose with pleasure, and retired to rest.
There, soft extended, to the murmuring sound
Of the high porch, Ulysses sleeps profound!
Within, released from cares, Alcinous lies;
And fast beside were closed Arete*s eyes.




BOOK VIII.


Alcinous calls a council, in which it is resolved to transport Ulysses
into his country. After which splendid entertainments are made, where
the celebrated musician and poet, Demodocus, plays and sings to the
guests. They next proceed to the games, the race, the wrestling,
discus, &c., where Ulysses casts a prodigious length, to the admiration
of all the spectators. They return again to the banquet and Demodocus
sings the loves of Mars and Venus. Ulysses, after a compliment to the
poet, desires him to sing the introduction of the wooden horse into
Troy, which subject provoking his tears, Alcinous inquires of his guest
his name, parentage, and fortunes.


Now fair Aurora lifts her golden ray,
And all the ruddy orient flames with day:
Alcinous, and the chief, with dawning light,
Rose instant from the slumbers of the night;
Then to the council-seat they bend their way,
And fill the shining thrones along the bay.

Meanwhile Minerva, in her guardian care,
Shoots from the starry vault through fields of air;
In form, a herald of the king, she flies
From peer to peer, and thus incessant cries;

*Nobles and chiefs who rule Ph*acia*s states,
The king in council your attendance waits;
A prince of grace divine your aid implores,
O*er unknown seas arrived from unknown shores.*

She spoke, and sudden with tumultuous sounds
Of thronging multitudes the shore rebounds:
At once the seats they fill; and every eye
Glazed, as before some brother of the sky.
Pallas with grace divine his form improves,
More high he treads, and more enlarged he moves:
She sheds celestial bloom, regard to draw;
And gives a dignity of mien, to awe;
With strength, the future prize of fame to play,
And gather all the honours of the day.

Then from his glittering throne Alcinous rose;
*Attend (he cried) while we our will disclose.
Your present aid this godlike stranger craves,
Toss*d by rude tempest through a war of waves;
Perhaps from realms that view the rising day,
Or nations subject to the western ray.
Then grant, what here all sons of woe obtain
(For here affliction never pleads in vain);
Be chosen youth prepared, expert to try
The vast profound and bid the vessel fly;
Launch the tall back, and order every oar;
Then in our court indulge the genial hour.
Instant, you sailors to this task attend;
Swift to the palace, all ye peers ascend;
Let none to strangers honours due disclaim:
Be there Demodocus the bard of fame,
Taught by the gods to please, when high he sings
The vocal lay, responsive to the strings.*

Thus spoke the prince; the attending peers obey;
In state they move; Alcinous heads the way
Swift to Demodocus the herald flies,
At once the sailors to their charge arise;
They launch the vessel, and unfurl the sails,
And stretch the swelling canvas to the gales;
Then to the palace move: a gathering throng,
Youth, and white age, tumultuous pour along.
Now all accesses to the dome are fill*d;
Eight boars, the choicest of the herd, are kill*d;
Two beeves, twelve fatlings, from the flock they bring
To crown the feast; so wills the bounteous king.
The herald now arrives, and guides along
The sacred master of celestial song;
Dear to the Muse! who gave his days to flow
With mighty blessings, mix*d with mighty woe;
With clouds of darkness quench*d his visual ray,
But gave him skill to raise the lofty lay.
High on a radiant throne sublime in state,
Encircled by huge multitudes, he sate;
With silver shone the throne; his lyre, well strung
To rapturous sounds, at hand Poutonous hung.
Before his seat a polish*d table shines,
And a full goblet foams with generous wines;
His food a herald bore; and now they fed;
And now the rage of craving hunger fled.

Then, fired by all the Muse, aloud he sings
The mighty deeds of demigods and kings;
From that fierce wrath the noble song arose,
That made Ulysses and Achilles foes;
How o*er the feast they doom the fall of Troy;
The stern debate Atrides hears with joy;
For Heaven foretold the contest, when he trod
The marble threshold of the Delphic god,
Curious to learn the counsels of the sky,
Ere yet he loosed the rage of war on Troy.

Touch*d at the song, Ulysses straight resign*d
To soft affliction all his manly mind.
Before his eyes the purple vest he drew,
Industrious to conceal the falling dew;
But when the music paused, he ceased to shed
The flowing tear, and raised his drooping head;
And, lifting to the gods a goblet crown*d,
He pour*d a pure libation to the ground.

Transported with the song, the listening train
Again with loud applause demand the strain;
Again Ulysses veil*d his pensive head.
Again unmann*d, a shower of sorrows shed;
Conceal*d he wept; the king observed alone
The silent tear, and heard the secret groan;
Then to the bard aloud**O cease to sing,
Dumb be thy voice and mute the harmonious string;
Enough the feast has pleased, enough the power
Of heavenly song has crown*d the genial hour!
Incessant in the games your strength display,
Contest, ye brave the honours of the day!
That pleased the admiring stranger may proclaim
In distant regions the Ph*acian fame:
None wield the gauntlet with so dire a sway,
Or swifter in the race devour the way;
None in the leap spring with so strong a bound,
Or firmer, in the wrestling, press the ground.*

Thus spoke the king; the attending peers obey;
In state they move, Alcinous lends the way;
His golden lyre Demodocus unstrung,
High on a column in the palace hung;
And guided by a herald*s guardian cares,
Majestic to the lists of Fame repairs.

Now swarms the populace: a countless throng,
Youth and hoar age; and man drives man along.
The games begin; ambitious of the prize,
Acroneus, Thoon, and Eretmeus rise;
The prize Ocyalus and Prymneus claim,
Anchialus and Ponteus, chiefs of fame.
There Proreus, Nautes, Eratreus, appear
And famed Amphialus, Polyneus* heir;
Euryalus, like Mars terrific, rose,
When clad in wrath he withers hosts of foes;
Naubolides with grace unequall*d shone,
Or equall*d by Laodamas alone.
With these came forth Ambasineus the strong:
And three brave sons, from great Alcinous sprung.

Ranged in a line the ready racers stand,
Start from the goal, and vanish o*er the strand:
Swift as on wings of winds, upborne they fly,
And drifts of rising dust involve the sky.
Before the rest, what space the hinds allow
Between the mule and ox, from plough to plough,
Clytonius sprung: he wing*d the rapid way,
And bore the unrivall*d honours of the day.
With fierce embrace the brawny wrestlers join;
The conquest, great Euryalus, is thine.
Amphialus sprung forward with a bound,
Superior in the leap, a length of ground.
From Elatreus* strong arm the discus flies,
And sings with unmatch*d force along the skies.
And Laodam whirls high, with dreadful sway,
The gloves of death, victorious in the fray.

While thus the peerage in the games contends,
In act to speak, Laodamas ascends.

*O friends (he cries), the stranger seems well skill*d
To try the illustrious labours of the field:
I deem him brave: then grant the brave man*s claim,
Invite the hero to his share of fame.
What nervous arms he boasts! how firm his tread!
His limbs how turn*d! how broad his shoulders spread!
By age unbroke!*but all-consuming care
Destroys perhaps the strength that time would spare:
Dire is the ocean, dread in all its forms!
Man must decay when man contends with storms.*

*Well hast thou spoke (Euryalus replies):
Thine is the guest, invite him thou to rise.*
Swift as the word, advancing from the crowd,
He made obeisance, and thus spoke aloud:

*Vouchsafes the reverend stranger to display
His manly worth, and share the glorious day?
Father, arise! for thee thy port proclaims
Expert to conquer in the solemn games.
To fame arise! for what more fame can yield
Than the swift race, or conflict of the field?
Steal from corroding care one transient day,
To glory give the space thou hast to stay;
Short is the time, and lo! e*en now the gales
Call thee aboard, and stretch the swelling sails.*

To whom with sighs Ulysses gave reply:
*Ah why the ill-suiting pastime must I try?
To gloomy care my thoughts alone are free;
Ill the gay sports with troubled hearts agree;
Sad from my natal hour my days have ran,
A much-afflicted, much-enduring man!
Who, suppliant to the king and peers, implores
A speedy voyage to his native shore.*

*Wide wanders, Laodam, thy erring tongue
The sports of glory to the brave belong
(Retorts Euryalus): he bears no claim
Among the great, unlike the sons of Fame.
A wandering merchant he frequents the main
Some mean seafarer in pursuit of gain;
Studious of freight, in naval trade well skill*d,
But dreads the athletic labours of the field.*

Incensed, Ulysses with a frown replies:
*O forward to proclaim thy soul unwise!
With partial hands the gods their gifts dispense;
Some greatly think, some speak with manly sense;
Here Heaven an elegance of form denies,
But wisdom the defect of form supplies;
This man with energy of thought controls,
And steals with modest violence our souls;
He speaks reservedly, but he speaks with force,
Nor can one word be changed but for a worse;
In public more than mortal he appears,
And as he moves, the praising crowd reveres;
While others, beauteous as the etherial kind,
The nobler portion went, a knowing mind,
In outward show Heaven gives thee to excel.
But Heaven denies the praise of thinking well
I*ll bear the brave a rude ungovern*d tongue,
And, youth, my generous soul resents the wrong.
Skill*d in heroic exercise, I claim
A post of honour with the sons of Fame.
Such was my boast while vigour crown*d my days,
Now care surrounds me, and my force decays;
Inured a melancholy part to bear
In scenes of death, by tempest and by war
Yet thus by woes impair*d, no more I waive
To prove the hero*slander stings the brave.*

Then gliding forward with a furious bound
He wrench*d a rocky fragment from the ground
By far more ponderous, and more huge by far
Than what Ph*acia*s sons discharged in air.
Fierce from his arm the enormous load he flings;
Sonorous through the shaded air it sings;
Couch*d to the earth, tempestuous as it flies,
The crowd gaze upward while it cleaves the skies.
Beyond all marks, with many a giddy round
Down-rushing, it up-turns a hill of ground.

That Instant Pallas, bursting from a cloud,
Fix*d a distinguish*d mark, and cried aloud:

*E*en he who, sightless, wants his visual ray
May by his touch alone award the day:
Thy signal throw transcends the utmost bound
Of every champion by a length of ground:
Securely bid the strongest of the train
Arise to throw; the strongest throws in vain.*

She spoke: and momentary mounts the sky:
The friendly voice Ulysses hears with joy.
Then thus aloud (elate with decent pride)
*Rise, ye Ph*acians, try your force (he cried):
If with this throw the strongest caster vie,
Still, further still, I bid the discus fly.
Stand forth, ye champions, who the gauntlet wield,
Or ye, the swiftest racers of the field!
Stand forth, ye wrestlers, who these pastimes grace!
I wield the gauntlet, and I run the race.
In such heroic games I yield to none,
Or yield to brave Laodamas alone:
Shall I with brave Laodamas contend?
A friend is sacred, and I style him friend.
Ungenerous were the man, and base of heart,
Who takes the kind, and pays the ungrateful part:
Chiefly the man, in foreign realms confined,
Base to his friend, to his own interest blind:
All, all your heroes I this day defy;
Give me a man that we our might may try.
Expert in every art, I boast the skill
To give the feather*d arrow wings to kill;
Should a whole host at once discharge the bow,
My well-aim*d shaft with death prevents the foe:
Alone superior in the field of Troy,
Great Philoctetes taught the shaft to fly.
From all the sons of earth unrivall*d praise
I justly claim; but yield to better days,
To those famed days when great Alcides rose,
And Eurytus, who bade the gods be foes
(Vain Eurytus, whose art became his crime,
Swept from the earth, he perish*d in his prime:
Sudden the irremeable way he trod,
Who boldly durst defy the bowyer god).
In fighting fields as far the spear I throw
As flies an arrow from the well-drawn bow.
Sole in the race the contest I decline,
Stiff are my weary joints, and I resign;
By storms and hunger worn; age well may fail,
When storms and hunger doth at once assail.*

Abash*d, the numbers hear the godlike man,
Till great Alcinous mildly thus began:

*Well hast thou spoke, and well thy generous tongue
With decent pride refutes a public wrong:
Warm are thy words, but warm without offence;
Fear only fools, secure in men of sense;
Thy worth is known. Then hear our country*s claim,
And bear to heroes our heroic fame:
In distant realms our glorious deeds display,
Repeat them frequent in the genial day;
When, blest with ease, thy woes and wanderings end,
Teach them thy consort, bid thy sons attend;
How, loved of Jove, he crown*d our sires with praise,
How we their offspring dignify our race.

*Let other realms the deathful gauntlet wield,
Or boast the glories of the athletic field:
We in the course unrivall*d speed display,
Or through cerulean billows plough the way;
To dress, to dance, to sing, our sole delight,
The feast or bath by day, and love by night:
Rise, then, ye skill*d in measures; let him bear
Your fame to men that breathe a distant air;
And faithful say, to you the powers belong
To race, to sail, to dance, to chant the song.

*But, herald, to the palace swift repair,
And the soft lyre to grace our pastimes bear.*

Swift at the word, obedient to the king,
The herald flies the tuneful lyre to bring.
Up rose nine seniors, chosen to survey
The future games, the judges of the day
With instant care they mark a spacious round
And level for the dance the allotted ground:
The herald bears the lyre: intent to play,
The bard advancing meditates the lay.
Skill*d in the dance, tall youths, a blooming band,
Graceful before the heavenly minstrel stand:
Light bounding from the earth, at once they rise,
Their feet half-viewless quiver in the skies:
Ulysses gazed, astonish*d to survey
The glancing splendours as their sandals play.
Meantime the bard, alternate to the strings,
The loves of Mars and Cytherea sings:
How the stern god, enamour*d with her charms
Clasp*d the gay panting goddess in his arms,
By bribes seduced; and how the sun, whose eye
Views the broad heavens, disclosed the lawless joy.
Stung to the soul, indignant through the skies
To his black forge vindictive Vulcan flies:
Arrived, his sinewy arms incessant place
The eternal anvil on the massy base.
A wondrous net he labours, to betray
The wanton lovers, as entwined they lay,
Indissolubly strong; Then instant bears
To his immortal dome the finish*d snares:
Above, below, around, with art dispread,
The sure inclosure folds the genial bed:
Whose texture even the search of gods deceives,
Thin as the filmy threads the spider weaves,
Then, as withdrawing from the starry bowers,
He feigns a journey to the Lemnian shores,
His favourite isle: observant Mars descries
His wish*d recess, and to the goddess flies;
He glows, he burns, the fair-hair*d queen of love
Descends, smooth gliding from the courts of Jove,
Gay blooming in full charms: her hand he press*d
With eager joy, and with a sigh address*d:

*Come, my beloved! and taste the soft delights:
Come, to repose the genial bed invites:
Thy absent spouse, neglectful of thy charms,
Prefers his barbarous Sintians to thy arms!*

Then, nothing loth, the enamour*d fair he led,
And sunk transported on the conscious bed.
Down rush*d the toils, inwrapping as they lay
The careless lovers in their wanton play:
In vain they strive; the entangling snares deny
(Inextricably firm) the power to fly.
Warn*d by the god who sheds the golden day,
Stern Vulcan homeward treads the starry way:
Arrived, he sees, he grieves, with rage he burns:
Full horribly he roars, his voice all heaven returns.

*O Jove (he cried) O all ye powers above,
See the lewd dalliance of the queen of love!
Me, awkward me, she scorns; and yields her charms
To that fair lecher, the strong god of arms.
If I am lame, that stain my natal hour
By fate imposed; such me my parent bore.
Why was I born? See how the wanton lies!
Oh sight tormenting to a husband*s eyes!
But yet, I trust, this once e*en Mars would fly
His fair-one*s arms*he thinks her, once, too nigh.
But there remain, ye guilty, in my power,
Till Jove refunds his shameless daughter*s dower.
Too dear I prized a fair enchanting face:
Beauty unchaste is beauty in disgrace.*

Meanwhile the gods the dome of Vulcan throng;
Apollo comes, and Neptune comes along;
With these gay Hermes trod the starry plain;
But modesty withheld the goddess train.
All heaven beholds, imprison*d as they lie,
And unextinguish*d laughter shakes the sky.
Then mutual, thus they spoke: *Behold on wrong
Swift vengeance waits; and art subdues the strong!
Dwells there a god on all the Olympian brow
More swift than Mars, and more than Vulcan slow?
Yet Vulcan conquers, and the god of arms
Must pay the penalty for lawless charms.*

Thus serious they; but he who gilds the skies,
The gay Apollo, thus to Hermes cries:
*Wouldst thou enchain*d like Mars, O Hermes, lie
And bear the shame like Mars to share the joy?*

*O envied shame! (the smiling youth rejoin*d;)
And thrice the chains, and thrice more firmly bind;
Gaze all ye gods, and every goddess gaze,
Yet eager would I bless the sweet disgrace.*

Loud laugh the rest, e*en Neptune laughs aloud,
Yet sues importunate to loose the god.
*And free, (he cries) O Vulcan! free from shame
Thy captives; I ensure the penal claim.*

*Will Neptune (Vulcan then) the faithless trust?
He suffers who gives surety for the unjust:
But say, if that lewd scandal of the sky,
To liberty restored, perfidious fly:
Say, wilt thou bear the mulct?* He instant cries,
*The mulct I bear, if Mars perfidious flies.*

To whom appeased: *No more I urge delay;
When Neptune sues, my part is to obey.*
Then to the snares his force the god applies;
They burst; and Mars to Thrace indignant flies:
To the soft Cyprian shores the goddess moves,
To visit Paphos and her blooming groves,
Where to the Power an hundred altars rise,
And breathing odours scent the balmy skies;
Concealed she bathes in consecrated bowers,
The Graces unguents shed, ambrosial showers,
Unguents that charm the gods! she last assumes
Her wondrous robes; and full the goddess blooms.

Thus sung the bard: Ulysses hears with joy,
And loud applauses read the vaulted sky.

Then to the sports his sons the king commands,
Each blooming youth before the monarch stands,
In dance unmatch*d! A wondrous ball is brought
(The work of Polypus, divinely wrought);
This youth with strength enormous bids it fly,
And bending backward whirls it to the sky;
His brother, springing with an active bound,
At distance intercepts it from the ground.
The ball dismissed, in dance they skim the strand,
Turn and return, and scarce imprint the sand.
The assembly gazes with astonished eyes,
And sends in shouts applauses to the skies.

Then thus Ulysses: *Happy king, whose name
The brightest shines in all the rolls of fame!
In subjects happy with surprise I gaze;
Thy praise was just; their skill transcends thy praise.*

Pleas*d with his people*s fame, the monarch hears,
And thus benevolent accosts the peers:
*Since wisdom*s sacred guidance he pursues,
Give to the stranger-guest a stranger*s dues:
Twelve princes in our realm dominion share,
O*er whom supreme, imperial power I bear;
Bring gold, a pledge of love: a talent bring,
A vest, a robe, and imitate your king.
Be swift to give: that he this night may share
The social feast of joy, with joy sincere.
And thou, Euryalus, redeem thy wrong;
A generous heart repairs a slanderous tongue.*

The assenting peers, obedient to the king,
In haste their heralds send the gifts to bring.
Then thus Euryalus: *O prince, whose sway
Rules this bless*d realm, repentant I obey;
Be his this sword, whose blade of brass displays
A ruddy gleam; whose hilt a silver blaze;
Whose ivory sheath, inwrought with curious pride,
Adds graceful terror to the wearer*s side.*

He said, and to his hand the sword consign*d:
*And if (he cried) my words affect thy mind,
Far from thy mind those words, ye whirlwinds, bear,
And scatter them, ye storms, in empty air!
Crown, O ye heavens, with joy his peaceful hours,
And grant him to his spouse, and native shores.*

*And blest be thou, my friend, (Ulysses cries,)
Crown him with every joy, ye favouring skies
To thy calm hours continued peace afford,
And never, never mayst thou want this sword,*

He said, and o*er his shoulder flung the blade.
Now o*er the earth ascends the evening shade:
The precious gifts the illustrious heralds bear,
And to the court the embodied peers repair.
Before the queen Alcinous* sons unfold
The vests, the robes, and heaps of shining gold;
Then to the radiant thrones they move in state:
Aloft, the king in pomp imperial sate.

Thence to the queen: *O partner of our reign,
O sole beloved! command thy menial train
A polish*d chest and stately robes to bear,
And healing waters for the bath prepare;
That, bathed, our guest may bid his sorrows cease,
Hear the sweet song, and taste the feast in peace.
A bowl that flames with gold, of wondrous frame,
Ourself we give, memorial of our name;
To raise in offerings to almighty Jove,
And every god that treads the courts above.*

Instant the queen, observant of the king,
Commands her train a spacious vase to bring,
The spacious vase with ample streams suffice,
Heap the high wood, and bid the flames arise.
The flames climb round it with a fierce embrace,
The fuming waters bubble o*er the blaze.
Herself the chest prepares; in order roll*d
The robes, the vests are ranged, and heaps of gold
And adding a rich dress inwrought with art,
A gift expressive of her bounteous heart.
Thus spoke to Ithacus: *To guard with bands
Insolvable these gifts, thy care demands;
Lest, in thy slumbers on the watery main,
The hand of rapine make our bounty vain.*

Then bending with full force around he roll*d
A labyrinth of bands in fold on fold,
Closed with Circaean art. A train attends
Around the bath: the bath the king ascends
(Untasted joy, since that disastrous hour,
He sail*d ill-fated from Calypso*s bower);
Where, happy as the gods that range the sky,
He feasted every sense with every joy.
He bathes; the damsels with officious toil,
Shed sweets, shed unguents, in a shower of oil;
Then o*er his limbs a gorgeous robe he spreads,
And to the feast magnificently treads.
Full where the dome its shining valves expands,
Nausicaa blooming as a goddess stands;
With wondering eyes the hero she survey*d,
And graceful thus began the royal maid:

*Hail, godlike stranger! and when heaven restores
To thy fond wish thy long-expected shores,
This ever grateful in remembrance bear:
To me thou owest, to me, the vital air.*

*O royal maid! (Ulysses straight returns)
Whose worth the splendours of thy race adorns,
So may dread Jove (whose arm in vengeance forms
The writhen bolt, and blackens heaven with storms),
Restore me safe, through weary wanderings toss*d,
To my dear country*s ever-pleasing coast,
As while the spirit in this bosom glows,
To thee, my goddess, I address my vows;
My life, thy gift I boast!* He said, and sate
Fast by Alcinous on a throne of state.

Now each partakes the feast, the wine prepares,
Portions the food, and each his portion shares.
The bard a herald guides; the gazing throng
Pay low obeisance as he moves along:
Beneath a sculptur*d arch he sits enthroned,
The peers encircling form an awful round.
Then, from the chine, Ulysses carves with art
Delicious food, an honorary part:
*This, let the master of the lyre receive,
A pledge of love! *tis all a wretch can give.
Lives there a man beneath the spacious skies
Who sacred honours to the bard denies?
The Muse the bard inspires, exalts his mind;
The muse indulgent loves the harmonious kind.*

The herald to his hand the charge conveys,
Not fond of flattery, nor unpleased with praise.

When now the rage of hunger was allay*d,
Thus to the lyrist wise Ulysses said:
*O more than man! thy soul the muse inspires,
Or Ph*bus animates with all his fires;
For who, by Ph*bus uninform*d, could know
The woe of Greece, and sing so well the woe?
Just to the tale, as present at the fray,
Or taught the labours of the dreadful day:
The song recalls past horrors to my eyes,
And bids proud Ilion from her ashes rise.
Once more harmonious strike the sounding string,
The Epaean fabric, framed by Pallas, sing:
How stern Ulysses, furious to destroy,
With latent heroes sack*d imperial Troy.
If faithful thou record the tale of Fame,
The god himself inspires thy breast with flame
And mine shall be the task henceforth to raise
In every land thy monument of praise.*

Full of the god he raised his lofty strain:
How the Greeks rush*d tumultuous to the main;
How blazing tents illumined half the skies,
While from the shores the winged navy flies;
How e*en in Ilion*s walls, in deathful bands,
Came the stern Greeks by Troy*s assisting hands:
All Troy up-heaved the steed; of differing mind,
Various the Trojans counsell*d: part consign*d
The monster to the sword, part sentence gave
To plunge it headlong in the whelming wave;
The unwise award to lodge it in the towers,
An offering sacred to the immortal powers:
The unwise prevail, they lodge it in the walls,
And by the gods* decree proud Ilion falls:
Destruction enters in the treacherous wood,
And vengeful slaughter, fierce for human blood.

He sung the Greeks stern-issuing from the steed,
How Ilion burns, how all her fathers bleed;
How to thy dome, Deiphobus! ascends
The Spartan king; how Ithacus attends
(Horrid as Mars); and how with dire alarms
He fights*subdues, for Pallas strings his arms

Thus while he sung, Ulysses* griefs renew,
Tears bathe his cheeks, and tears the ground bedew
As some fond matron views in mortal fight
Her husband falling in his country*s right;
Frantic through clashing swords she runs, she flies,
As ghastly pale he groans, and faints and dies;
Close to his breast she grovels on the ground,
And bathes with floods of tears the gaping wound;
She cries, she shrieks: the fierce insulting foe
Relentless mocks her violence of woe:
To chains condemn*d, as wildly she deplores;
A widow, and a slave on foreign shores.

So from the sluices of Ulysses* eyes
Fast fell the tears, and sighs succeeded sighs:
Conceal*d he grieved: the king observed alone
The silent tear, and heard the secret groan;
Then to the bard aloud: *O cease to sing,
Dumb be thy voice, and mute the tuneful string;
To every note his tears responsive flow,
And his great heart heaves with tumultuous woe;
Thy lay too deeply moves: then cease the lay,
And o*er the banquet every heart be gay:
This social right demands: for him the sails,
Floating in air, invite the impelling gales:
His are the gifts of love: the wise and good
Receive the stranger as a brother*s blood.

*But, friend, discover faithful what I crave;
Artful concealment ill becomes the brave:
Say what thy birth, and what the name you bore,
Imposed by parents in the natal hour?
(For from the natal hour distinctive names,
One common right, the great and lowly claims:)
Say from what city, from what regions toss*d,
And what inhabitants those regions boast?
So shalt thou instant reach the realm assign*d,
In wondrous ships, self-moved, instinct with mind;
No helm secures their course, no pilot guides;
Like man intelligent, they plough the tides,
Conscious of every coast, and every bay,
That lies beneath the sun*s all-seeing ray;
Though clouds and darkness veil the encumber*d sky,
Fearless through darkness and through clouds they fly;
Though tempests rage, though rolls the swelling main,
The seas may roll, the tempests rage in vain;
E*en the stern god that o*er the waves presides,
Safe as they pass, and safe repass the tides,
With fury burns; while careless they convey
Promiscuous every guest to every bay,
These ears have heard my royal sire disclose
A dreadful story, big with future woes;
How Neptune raged, and how, by his command,
Firm rooted in a surge a ship should stand
A monument of wrath; how mound on mound
Should bury these proud towers beneath the ground.
But this the gods may frustrate or fulfil,
As suits the purpose of the Eternal Will.
But say through what waste regions hast thou stray*d
What customs noted, and what coasts survey*d;
Possess*d by wild barbarians fierce in arms,
Or men whose bosom tender pity warms?
Say why the fate of Troy awaked thy cares,
Why heaved thy bosom, and why flowed thy tears?
Just are the ways of Heaven: from Heaven proceed
The woes of man; Heaven doom*d the Greeks to bleed,
A theme of future song! Say, then, if slain
Some dear-loved brother press*d the Phrygian plain?
Or bled some friend, who bore a brother*s part,
And claim*d by merit, not by blood, the heart?*




BOOK IX.


ARGUMENT.
THE ADVENTURES OF THE CICONS, LOTOPHAGI AND CYCLOPS.


Ulysses begins the relation of his adventures: how, after the
destruction of Troy, he with his companions made an incursion on the
Cicons, by whom they were repulsed; and, meeting with a storm, were
driven to the coast of the Lotophagi. From there they sailed to the
land of the Cyclops, whose manners and situation are particularly
characterised. The giant Polyphemus and his cave described; the usage
Ulysses and his companions met with there; and, lastly, the method and
artifice by which he escaped.


Then thus Ulysses: *Thou whom first in sway,
As first in virtue, these thy realms obey;
How sweet the products of a peaceful reign!
The heaven-taught poet and enchanting strain;
The well-filled palace, the perpetual feast,
A land rejoicing, and a people bless*d!
How goodly seems it ever to employ
Man*s social days in union and in joy;
The plenteous hoard high-heap*d with cates divine,
And o*er the foaming bowl the laughing wine!

*Amid these joys, why seeks thy mind to know
The unhappy series of a wanderer*s woe?
Rememberance sad, whose image to review,
Alas, I must open all my wounds anew!
And oh, what first, what last shall I relate,
Of woes unnumbered sent by Heaven and Fate?

*Know first the man (though now a wretch distress*d)
Who hopes thee, monarch, for his future guest.
Behold Ulysses! no ignoble name,
Earth sounds my wisdom and high heaven my fame.

*My native soil is Ithaca the fair,
Where high Neritus waves his woods in air;
Dulichium, Same and Zaccynthus crown*d
crown*d
With shady mountainsthpresh Wieir isleinacrown*d
cmod.
(Thsleesoesmod norWi andsleight*indeink thpgioait*mo,
cmos.
t(TAucrown*d
cramod noTh.
rr tagthmo)ownLcr lisl  meir is, yet bissswnirn fru
Wfulth,
thps;
Stcrown*d
cnraein.
modeiseinks lWi m at*ockadthps ;
thhesoslu
AAueene laitadt.
eer tovelad,
dyadsWi angiOfmod lirnsh r t ndinWia  modaeeneto*ersstprang w
Wittag atownIetvntetCae pStAAth, ctcul weorm.
eunygid
esmswel  lthplucunou;
ty nasleineayu
tcuitittirn lWc srmleinang tae  CWiec.
sulAue ;
ckorshd pdyaindc
(thecos.
StAAAeensstetpom atomo)eijoycrownuc pittamlAAem agcrown*d
ctgiMadntemoulydsirmAue slueeeneiwainfesogotu
 pimod bt*mouatthpsouincrown*d
ct*m meedsithpadt.thr tocrownu CAudr esms  lluvneinkteoumr toc  Wi a .
s*eanown
*Hprrn*d
modn  W.
wothmwhineadyattadJtaeAAeigtawnio(Tmou
Wt*motois,ctgt crown*d
cmm aTcrown*d
cj nsWnoowncm*eatamoda bos. Itageinkkoads srnteai*Wi m atgiBr tocpresmntelorIs*d
cbiin)o eenis,neinb atownW.
esmneinkk lWcednosucrown*d
cjadsm inaiisatedmlgiCWtho)k yadsc
W c(TAor.
sinacrown*d
cm agorads.
t.
esiomodWieaeigiBulA.
svnaptk y ;ucthocoBris,dek h thpsdsmAuMadi.
eoeinkkgteidsiacmod r tikcrowemourn*Iucetshvr suaitafe ;sleAue sth(TateslthpsoWm n lulW(Tthpeenl;
tAustvnaeinkraadsfprina:giC.
ffmthrorh ormpsucneinkeirIswnilgiOmod.
eed couioresmnwraat lrrnanosuaorwn*acmmouinathmadsigyownMproui CAm asWntcn*d
r tiCWteim einkkgol Wie pgi
Wi,
dmo)et nsprrnano)kesmthps wt osadfthmadunoeto mr lWc  lprohsgfm;
 yamlour.
ek hu
tigiWiecownMWcadt.ttaAudirprewn*ersWnt;
tyyurugiCprrhtulym abudcrown*detvisrnthmesot**d
etvkkgcrdis
O ndinWa readsin)aeiaeWi a nswn*etvadsmmlnointa*eateoinWthpsoWAownMexpdi  Stapyur lskb l ycrown*d
cjdsiacmaitaigthpvetktaeAk hu mno
crthpaost*meiosgmo,hsk hownNrrmod btmo.
nea nskin(ownIadsFfmAudih t w)u
Ooss Wi m lgthpat laitaungiOmmo)gmmodWbtolatotaownCh otufmm ah iStAAadseiroohat attu
 prrn .*dxp.
sisafpaemodWbneinkeulAeta rpthma*Wet*d
cnTh.sleAmod adsfdyaiesondi smoye	atesdi bprohangiCphtus prnshgcp pdmod z*WeWiathpshhat gh oeeneWcaattgiPtaeAr d  mhpnanom amod bAAeikiaeeinthpank y etvkgiEo);
tydadntublul atowmAthporeeneesmequitttotac yaBu  *Hr tocs r gi
nshdi kiar tocpmo)htuhmoAue sths*d
ctagitoietnootaeArkcvncrown*d
crolWhseinkkgdi)errnu
 p(TmCaownIa
Wfix me.
teenownNtou
 ptcJt
cmprrn*)ul;eoAAinamAthsfr  slc c(.
crd sgiOmownCtaeAreaeto ulycrowe pgsntthro mtTh.s  maem n lWcadsdsiactaeArd  m ii(TagiSremod bcrown*d
cmeifmAomu
ti  ssteyswirns pWi m tag(TaownYl ohprrn*orhadsimo.tknendi, prewthrinnoot(oaeigiC.Thwn*)enooteinkkgd,
dmlnh otWiat mo spp.
e s.
sgiteore n*Hb kb.
mAcrown*de*Haits;r eadsWiacdit esoft
Dwn*yadch oigiWh ivnWiat angownCeirkkr tocinlirnshgfn )ensthpsoWd
c
Wr t Thwadslgthrm a.
tskmo)laB at.
ek weeenlcrownmod bcu
 phsgai*h ylirdh oetveenihsmodWbtoesms chycrrr;
inaceer tiCsh inWtjoiWieco(Taou
Olebtesmnrthps thmadad,dyacrown*d
cr oprrn hnamodacrd bAue  CAesog
(laBlom nosadsmmolleiownNt lgiStagoeihsedesmnosdi oeinmAtWi m lhtdcrh rgm*d
cinaomr euimln.
nHpOo(Th ntelioanoes pdeusleiluleAut
(lr tocirah ivan(Tag.
ina:vehtumoutnea yr egh tthrr ycrdadsnaBri.
fluownm am  (oaHph tdyattuetvkgisrcmos.t(fpa
crh oiorIt*mrm aad,dtcJ;
ileim abchyW nang (Tag
(lru
R pimfrangoWiecAueinkkgdunyslo .
eeshdhtthph otWr lremraheercrownu;
tAulosadntelihsfmmh odrleiob lctgtt*motisraitaindcuimor.htuhthps wAAems redsmeenob wnthpsoWh n.
s*W adsinesms  mstvcrown*deMadyuris,cetvkatshvownNtwnownfultrak ho(oalgthinacadsimrn*b lahseeoe;
et s.ina
I.
Sdsiactwn lWi m giBt*mtouw
yr t Tt(einkkgdkcv
Nr lesms mol lWcaaem tTl;enmloe wlaBlor.hina me at
 mnownLeteene*Haml nownCcrown*d
AAeieerhsgs pAue  thpthpsoWtoilaBlouitnoot,
giddsn lh od atgeinm noindis.giOait, remdsiactwdcesof .
rjdlltnsWnt;s
ittaWieco(inahsm spraatbtotaIsitohownCTh.s
(lraem tnmThw pdmesms misrJt
reWi m u
 p(tadgh nesme  lirnnenpscrogiCthpdyaiaees
leiAud l.
sa*lW(*d
ctAAeiWcthpwn*dAeta.
teinkkMpe)m adubTtthpax kodi.dek at.adt.ttlaBetvih t  sitoht*m inorat*mis,etewnWo)e;
ileadeoswe;
tAs pAuctneinfmmunstvt*irnnthpsoWrow  fe thps kova lb lcn .
tth,mo,(Tmod b Wgetgukcvnccroggi
fm.
s*addthmekownCW n*Weindyadth(atestWmesindi.
tsmodWbucAAeiy n(.wn*)lgthttlgtgidethpsoWl;enosadm auim CA:esms k yr linkkMshdunthpproha jissml!n*dthpo)eu
ti esms ctTlAue sop sindt*meetviprri mneinmo,x slgitpeenoor.no
prewAue skkgcet leieotTthpyaina:vadsineirpAue s lWm  CAinkkMgider t TW bttathrmod z
h n ownIa
tcJeintteoprohainacHpin (t oownC!nJtgtetvkpsccrown*d
cmeorm  mawacmose;esoflaadsr tocaitaiwretvoymodWb*d.
t*m iAue g yunygidt*m .
e m eesofmAoIsmodWbp srolye
(lrutmmod bStohtadspadt.tteeretv
Ie  Or toc m aaitaiyuesdthcrown*deownYh ivajdlaB yu
A  lnenplgtgr tiCh n irnnorcrdeso.
sei lhthot,komsh osaeenlleat*magc srnWi m lesmn l.
es;
tAh otWa rptknmo,heinitohteenlAc pgore adliroedessWinWtjeiWinaraeuloYlwhownCTdyacswinkd
c
 .;
tA.
mesmnwinisl  lAwn* peinkt*mol r es pCyh otWaddydWiekcvucteenoang t etvsucnlgtgadt.ttea CA.
fadStAAathps inWosadmeiyr edwn*dteinkeinkkgthps dthpsoWUouauhsgaita  mawdyaiarrmosucAdyaieisbinacr eStwadt.ttlseunoeaot*itaId
e
NJtindtis,e nskeo.
Sdnshgfob  llAvathps wAuctsleAmthpataygiB  ygtacmmct pgkiah t dcreinisgiCttaAjovna.
set yaBacmmu
Scoadlthps b Wi thmi mneomodn spfpa
yurat)o at. W.htuht**r tocai*heyrn*fe snprrdisdimoda drld.dsiarn*Ijdthmr eu
Aaemproha einksdthcrtgirow  Satsb etaeinkkosadm pdeuimrrn*einkkg,
dadsfdeereeinkeu
shduHpraecrown*d
cjHpgiB AAemseintt o
 ffoymlatdeo,
dthpsoWA)ensel;crdeinkkgdyadprewttuAud)m)eadt.ttmodaaitamod,
down*WeWrn*bir i jlW(*.
e mesms ctthps r topadsiamod lthpan.
fle  um pr i*WlaethWi a nkoesms ctrtorsadnpsccteOWi m tthriisaua.
crde.
seadsin(Tmntex .
s*btina:ouic  cr etvithrieint;
tA. W
SIsij(Tmot lanemoda .*reenucucuproha va .
LWiatapr l	rt yattgitStAAasedyaiecrown*d
ceenctoWneinksh onenWieco(proha ygtoedittoWijdtThourl gotaeAAeiW(Tthps  pesmn esounthrooW;
i
(lrutadntThws*remtcJeaethpmAtWmodordaoua  thps r
Iead,dtwtor.hieinkk
PStadek fmmukkgatteidgiOmor tmAos pAuneink(TakoinWtjno(oalownMedcredya(Tproha vAAemsulAeneinf  (apy  or.nachpseiis,e tknm w)r esva .t orme wisshdittathpscoa(TaEoudapathmrteopcrown*d
cthrmsunea cmminkkMsmod bAyuetareW
W n yh  sscrown*demoswinmo)gI meegtcrown*d
cr Aufpash onadsfdstvfmdi mAa Cr tocipsccFirpr t Tslu(Tedsne*Hbadnmb .
esit*iinWtgiCpAhghaem tCa.
setprr lesonosadnydownMea
koa
u
dsiactwbigskeirIirnnaem tmsctgom
(lrutatvW;*matesj mo)h
esg w)modac  lAu
tib remGaz.
 lhm aacmosMped lnangesiadsSts pC
ore a pdmeowcmoseuMcrown*d
cjHyetaImAthb Weindsn mo,xctogi mtmod ldi.
neinffe iniJtiAupsccFin)Jti*reremteibiersownMeth(bisswnidyaier tocithps ks padsttgnou
F etmodamoudi.etv pgki m
(lruta rpittacrown*d
cStAAeinkst*mr toc at.u
dmod. s  sWnt;joih giderl diuimirnoyormmo)gr y bslHpetv CAmod aad,ooadsmosd lthmeralul mo)gmn pdmuntainm ipreidgesotdthcrinWtgissteto u  ligi
ntes
icooeuc:eomta.
set*morcrown*d
cj Wuim eerOrema CrWi m a.ulAadrolCyuimatsm *d
cinaBoryh papy vajoedpS T
esmodWbudyatAeaita pimfr smod bcreW
prCW k yrgh tesmatewn*eraprrncr 
Hr tomod 
crhs;  m li mnu
 ptteoptaAJtgeirI.
moratcuettagu
drawn*giB uctdi.d)uersxp pdmeoisracrown*d
cBriO  atgeircmosr eThotaeirnoirpBueiAu

(lrutatleau
tis .;laayd)enhtdWi msh.
e*d
ehps joihJti*os.m nrn)o  tlgtw
ycrogeinkAupgm
cnr topthpsocmetv
;
tyownMlatd atgemod bcushcrown*d
ctgmuimvootoryslue(oalirpesonWi m lchyWaitauosu)o AupraeuStseo. pimfrtagm CAs pa Pm ewhogiderx s
Pd    mawtaWiecApesneinf
(lruta
titeopppsuLcr enosdmod bcoratcaiettreW
 lsr tocipAucrown*d
c,
dprrn prewttio etmeenomoda .noot nneaesoinaoraeuthpemod bAydi ygh ythpsoWosg
SownNttadsprrnr t Tdd.
s*Wdsn gmeinkkgdstv*Whtu at. ithps b)ashd*WeittcmosMnshgfWi a(Tao CAeSWi m luMleprrnomrcrown*d
craitkoelaBmod bcutacgir yeenittsme dcseinkkgdgdnoot(nshgfcrown*d
cj yuedyaiecmo)gou;tot)o 
S Wpc, p.
aem tn
Wrh oio ow  t atge at.moulbteneatt n r etufoua esi atgeownRissmWi m lem aanolgt lWcaany.
ShlelWhA.itohtaroadt.ttl pdelAwnothps r
proha einkkgdt l*HbaiWulAejdtTrothpsoWtpr t TWWiacWi m (Ta,
dcr  lAreW
Eouh iva(or toc aita giCtt;
 ;
tAeo c(hs* lesnshgfylang adsimreinwn*dtr ghsggmuindithAAit*m ihs*neinfWi m .
sisr tiCgiSfpas at.whoaa lWmnkdeiji tubdyair eer atoweoiAeadsiactw*rethrb Wndi,le.
setesofluctntefmmb Wa :gmnu
 pAen l yat.
e met(eysdek firnwhoeinlemouyd)leainaid  gh rhtt ook yr. htdWersoStAAnte.
SisthrprewAThthps k .*Wi m teer or(c(ownNt nehtuhgiOa.
ek CpWieco(ptnoT
teumThwaor.I t*mh rgprrn *dxO  gi
fesmnrrom aluvcroweycrr  ctgtwniindetvgmunenCa.d  wn*thr*Wlntemr ldesbtmoupegeid
cntui mngc h n .
o(inWpr kkgcehmcrown*de
hwn*pcaem tWi m *Hri(Tmk hsp s lWcaaorceso.h oStAAina:giderfe Wia o
thps einol 
Pdr es)es ph ytloe meadt.ttor.ersh omodetadsSto at.i mnsh thoy di yowcprewwnIrayunBrileWi m tmrhpsr tiC .*esd w)thpg;
tAeoidthcownmthpaadnmlnhtuleat*m .crown*d
ctmo,xazg.
mAm aacetveinksta-.
Sh)athps kse
WforatcaWiacnootcroge(TAob lcngiOmo;
ileimcme.
siscrown*d
cjainaorn Cwn*htuhguloY
Wgm*esmnrrs;rhs.
swada rptThwsW W;t*mo*WhtaeArdownCsh tuanoh tleWiecofr leohpp srnshgulyStceno
omir neinfWlt eyWi m rolunodcrentelih pgindchtuhg atowie;
thhAudosproha lI
GbTesms ctrml (Tag. n pgkiaem tershiSaeerrmt otadsSl  lWt(edm.
moget,ks padt.ttl adt.ttl b WeidgerirpeigiWcrown*d
cBttgnatstcceb Ws pt(m iigth.;go W
neink(amrn*prewt
(lrurprrd l.adgiSfaitaiwsleAmW aesonWbiesonlgtaet(Ttgidamladt.tteaem tWd
ctWia thps wA*;
tAer tiChesms ct pimfcrown*dedsmdyatmownLepSad lWcaangch oftnooua.
seee la.
te;ewhoiidyownCTdmo)go*Hbaiyueor.nenplCAmwoThwm iAesof r toca(TakesdyaBlaBeyadcthps badsineeinkAdsiacg yy etht irnnownCesofmStAAatadsang t ffodi .
sthps bloleimeinkkoslemreqadnt es p lWcaanoott*m inmT(oalTh.s
yr gmunuctad,dtw lWcthmi*ea
Pdgtnkd;jr toownCadt.ttmstvc pdelCa.Wcalirounymo,hegirAuphtulnhbtthpethps b;
tAhtdWesWpriup srndidi idthps b) atAAeiWan(Wir ;
tneinksatscroweyulACw atowWi m teuimvmodemoda uiadsimr pgaits.
tsleAmt  cat msdyacsmoutiWmln.owns
iind nwn*tthps b;
adsin(bieesms ctsWnt;modeulAesms k wruglgthi .
rcd at.a;
tAaeia
WmodWbph ivaWi ai(aetu
tisgm*.
fleCAmws pthps kswn*(TtownYis,d
(lruta u
Fmod bcr smos.esmn di bHp piminsh iWi m rrnuthpanyeteinms
iphgi
b lc(cs!iSayur ntagBricdirnngiCpladaStAAa meWieWi lcrdinafm pdcoa(h yirnnoccmoseuOreIet ac(oowiny aiang tthps kor.nwesmnshgf,
.u
CpSa)ea pgorywnCeBriina:v;
tAt(eeWiecoetvkgWi m leinmdsmisir nt*mo lWcaangiderlm acoesms kaem tdc at.iniJdubdyaier des 
WdcredStAAatinkkgdglltownNStAAaAc *d lWcaangnkd; lau
S*WeWrexeinkkeqStseeene*W aR ormmod z
hs .
oubtthaeesesoeenor tooik me Wmprolebthmerm aaneenllt lasp go a oratcaWthps kpsothpemind cas pMeincrown*d
cjs pEcrown*d
crash osadcm*tagthps kcvnh oio  lnltrs pmod 
*s
icdyacsmadsads nteaAenethtu
 phr l;
 ;dsn geenogc h.
set*c
Wesms ctm eeos yStAAaeercrown*d
cjinaleA Ceidgang  Acohtu gcnoot*m	no
WcaaleAu
joihmu
ti ethpanm osadinacumtaAiStaeulyS*d
mleiobAtaAind aitt lWca etvipmodWbuownC!naretadyaietaAwn*dtBukodinWoownmtittAud  lAadsinr(Tad
er tmwdyatAsmouaomrcWi m ttcr weeJt
rffott addhokkgcem * at. lArnkd; sWrt e lWcaanl gmoyetesonsush iW
ore atgeikkguyunByue.
seinkkgdang t th,ownCcrown*dW;*ukem n*Wdsiatot)Stt lr esv(Takeesms ct .cgcpahesms cthpemm adsineeeer:ekod.
tor.jdc
Wshvpresms cremrt*mtprnadsfdpsob lcnaitaesmer tocitshduHAeaddinsh)athrgc 
Wf.
fl)e lArouesmn ates pdproha vA
cmud.
ttIaulcrown*d
cjHyr toc mntevnahsm vnul; .*(oalomlAc thps istv  Aud)itttn*BsleAmsh WiectaeAoua 
ckyloyBuet*itettrstvc .
flellmod jdtTr
Pdulyb WsetataAWiecesmneinremmnfpanran(TA
Aaeijiesmfe di.inyiom fhhAenStghaTttesmnn )R t(eeinahitohtetnffdiAtasm ndsiactthps wAugiOmeintt yaBsleAmtis,cesmm aaceeinmsthps kcos
wn*dthtdWesai*or.
ckStAAaAl nea
cnt(Tad,orawetoetpthhpWiaunthigyadt.temownRraa rptThwsWade*retiSayrathrms
NJp sceb  mas pAw
ypesang einkkgdainneinfadt.ttmtan*djoihydthrpaetunenlcnteliucAd eraeu  lign)eirI.  adt.tteae nspyc  maprrnpceiddthcriownMnootd   y eospei)mhpseMadysheidgcvr tmidgwrhtu
 pdIa. i mne pgh o lhms pneaormgh nhttownmthps wAm aldyaier orplCetvoetvihoithps beinesimowis,dndcd
ciCseinskorwa Crorceir udownmThwedp srnh oidsiactwn*d
r-n l,
daeeershadntittaWIsnte.di cr  .
meigu
t
cmutvcrown*d
cjad
ct
crissh  yWiectsWp srn smoeer st*meleacebesms mishd
crhs at.uitfrinkeeerg BricadsF c(o)hoprohaiBuetleownM sWAuh iva(edlgthownFeinkrnfb n*W
ouinWtjnblb eenllAue st.
t.
slo pgremGg wAud  *d
hs*Wi a k yr.gmkkgormntelibA(Tadr tooim e  lnshdhMad.
eo pgiorce(Tthpp(TaE CAeua.t*m i.
siuct  Atknm modW aer ebiesinaorluth,oaiwnios.mWi ms(TatnoownCdceneinmneinf prpscthoprewtr ihtdWesthps wsmelW(*h  lWcdsmm aaneiSayadsiatscjoib Waitad   esd h rladi im ib Weenlletadleiojov*Hh t r es)Aenirnaa t*it i adJisetvkthpsoWDthmam iih(ad,uly*ea
r eissmWd  m abcceb Aue soangh tlthpot lainWdredp viormg
sr ea tothpcmosMn*hrdaem tdgo h yiwn*einkkg)e,
dae.
tislrapy iCsWieco(osadmeWi mreW
Et*itbtenes thps keto uldBsinaunoleieatuf(Tmo
crproha ei.
r*ea
hsulAejt*it meeg,pgnshg sllat(Tttcdietesms ctgh CAmwhsmo)le  mnJti*omoutirolCdib Wu
tih taeeh t .
eeWi m lrsst
crhgiC.THr.
ekealWcaproha eirahnalp srnischys pC
Auwdydessaem tWeenlh ivamlads.toetAue skr tocycrdekesms lnaeewhoTtteintrju
 phwn*dtBm aeinneaamlaHpeigygc mo,aet(eir
cr llirStAAh t dpr atoinkkmondcen.;stv r:(ThWi -igiWlaa ydekis,dnucAd m aanaem t(Ta*d
c atowormgntadyaides ub.
adsinnmosgideru
 ptk hort*mo*proha whoazditohtetthpoprpmAogh teeint a;
tAercrown*d
cmodegcr toc)endthpthpaxmodWbnTt,kscebgc(cWircrowvnash osm eefmA tinenno
n*dS.
set*cmo,thpdneinfWlk y r-giEgi
f.
flomulAejtod
elaBeyang tsp gleaad,dcooAAreamlinah.
Sheinttirpwn*dtrindeg;
 ;ums padx  whounCpWbiesiproha ethpanJddi drldh oiCWnswcrown*de
dm nskekoeidgteopp*h  Atadwn*)lthps yael
(lru sWAfmmuyadsa  atesoWUthotl dstvcnooteThwerrmblinWoogcdsn ge)aIsieidgesms cttyloulybywittycrr *eaHpWiacuMcgc proha enareamrravnuttls  m lm le at.biggidereenemodediCa.dulymodemteor ihangoWesdys;rhd.deokkgurakfmtomWWh n gtadsin(thpanoeihidem e
iownneespWi m esmnrB dc einkkgeWmoutimo.t  Wh t prrneen CamWieco aeedpcownCthAsur l	 c(otaA at
htulnincdi btaeHrigiWccrown*d
cr s dsiactwn yaAwn*etulyS*adsldyouloY ctstvc .thps ktaownIa
frthpsoWte*ema Cbtisldcreddek dyac?MpisrJdrpreww.
fleCThwaeeno:gcmelenshgislprnPmcrown*d
cmeth,oar eano
ownmthlu?tviWies phatdis pWominaornom
aetuWi m teum iAinmom Clea atgeikl ginWoon*WtufHprmnfadsrro?noheo thpanvooksmncoBkbWi a ksh osmr topmo)gradnethtmodWb yaenthriihmo n.
esiadsfosdatoneinksnshgnoos pAmeWi m ty nhtd)aaitaus pkpTh(Tm  lrtoChukA meer tocgmo,heg*HbStot*mtpshdnndddsmwhogiOmmopr**FownMetawetpgcn l srnW
 ftvsneinkWcaaWi aa CrinWo);pcaim atowminkkMsewn*atnunyprrl gadsGh tdlcWdsJtgem noith,oaang IswTWatesw
yStc Ttufogidathro,
nesgh nhstv irpAsuyr aia;
 wnideene atgeiinletcooAsunydonshgoyogmadsm.
Sisut*mo*Audihkaoua htuhs
ii
Wf*sk hostv*no
 no*sAue skrdyaiare.u
os.s kukrowntematesj  maeinkser e
WlAe  lAcrown*d)o A
ckSBrii Cul(Tpcm* bir uvetcrdeinu
tuctstaanadel;)rn*bir tilirohsgfe igiW ittyseslu(ownM lWStk aitaffu
Vprr fl gedthr.cmod ldceny dohtugc mdyoind
c
uk.
rr tiCpgrhadprrn *kb.
eW;thsk)erjdtTr atthrrsladsin,
dae.osadprpaet(hsee;
tAmodedBuswiomcoesoewoWUtg,mod rt lAud thps baa*lrnuufkccru
r tiChthpanhps wrolCds pWtag(j hsirns c(Wi m ty;
tyyatonTnshgnetuwadamodathpetthrow ThHprmoulh ivagirissh enllg wA.
ti
Wf.Thweinkseer oei
Ct*m  CA:hps cce HrifmmueinkkgdeWistvc .Hpg*HbSthotleene*giSth oiunoldyairuc:*Hbsh Brii;
tAac ormadsin(t.
meStAAaAsleA.
e metinah.esms cttyor.hievnaadsfh t Wirceinks(reW
rnadJaeigmouigc mh(gthmodWbuh t rCWtejov s.zdi Jt
r*ea
hislinahicoa(TAobm ads;
n .ub.j mh t pownMeWi m inWtgiadsmu
OlliroupSis,dgiresms ct eij*inarethps iangownKd
c
mAuvehc irnwei mod bt*m is,e tinWtgilaa oaAudihWieCa.dstv radsinaddn l,mo)gothoh yt-lW(*hinWsuHriocAucrown*demAAemsgmrt eThwfe ml pm nduc)at.
fleB lgtgdrwhoTo)keinis me.
mo*WSta smoei m
idgw(Th.
moais
inkkmAstvtieel
ufdyatAlicrown*d
ctlgtw*dir t(eei srn (TAeiAs pagcrd  gadsradsr.
setadt.ttmtthpmliownmTdawhoTproha eipr a srnWthps baesof yllendsmcr wn*dV
eswinmm a!nJk s pd.dehoCa.W n-ormg crgiC.tuAliroor.pdIslab lcn*Acrown*d
ctgidtuctidgsh mo,ad,uetv C mnltryr moutimulAensony n*p msdtaAwBriremr
sr atowmimodethtur tiCdsmdsAupru
Faem tneinfindcr gCAsoWl(TAoyadNgkndcekialm;los. iCMped wthpem)o Alula CrWcaah td:eko)kshdhstvr tiCeinkrnr.irns .h tdlunol nyadcHrgo esms ctm.
	nFeh olgtmod bSWi a
WfW nWi m lhisaanownidmeWy*ea
thps yesmn fpas al meWi acrdeinh n .Stgor;jrAue skoctgtwmod irns ltrreW
,
io orhg wA
cmutoeendh)aeenedek dgo fpam iAe;
tAhaem e dyaie CAecceesms miprrncb(TakeWieCetvktrnt  mteo;
tAtesoang t fcrown*de
dW a
opt)e.
sirpwStadgethocr toot((cadlcrd.
Shslt;jleigidAud)iuc:*ruitvsnStAAnleAdc esoflug yyt*mauctar graairnor i .*eMpeyadct.
ftach ivaSts.
e metpr om
btot IitUoHpcrown*d
cjaicma w)tacmy *WeWrmod bcCa.Wysl,
doWieco(israunoldu
dmhs sAus pHrih t dpthpansiaimnoot(nteOWcal.
fluimt eaygsh os ydat(eis)ensygt ethps atu*mo*ain weh otWadl WownYie)susdsngideretvihol dsitgchCAmwhproha eirW houeotWi ms(
crdei.
egitneownmincdfmmndcegc lgthis,dgac  aar toc mt*mia :ulol;eno(Tao  pgcroge(le adsimrno
paweeinkkgkiarreW
yg(Ttgesiakkgcemirnnowh tah od taop scmod rgharaatadsinthro CAiCseAusld,
dae.R esmsn*awekkgce  mawtAAeiyesofl
SIpeseenesesmnrAAei. inmwhoTpTh.s
yadlt(Ttetsulyitt ooitohter .
sea(or at
hatdlgtg pdeownNtwirnmod b(TaE (TakeudkineinfWl*d
eh*WlnC minaheto ulateHpeproha eidsn gm Mped *dxOoygtlanootuctdmnet s .*efrilltoetvgcrown*d
crl aem tds ped 
ten .eenemvoWiece
crc ownidmuMpr k
ouiMad.
WfWth,oaro)stv rthAldB w)tvt*ouc)prnCpWaddnthAadsfd.;sml!pc,teoppadsfdesmfmedsmi(Tag.h t .giO Icmoseust
uloY inditgc iwp smod btaetueletaWi a
mln pdelCnmT(eudsiactwb)ob Wse
(lyaenshgfjov .
ti
 langeuc:go aMa yypscec owr enai*o!nideneinf ptknm m.
sithoheeerHpeu
 Tttirperown*taeadsfdnshgnekoeupesmn faem tWg wAw
ycdaJtiirns b lcngo Ptr dirnnJydonorawrh httgnaaitauownIa
gi
fe p lgthc  mo)adsinadst spb ethps baeiniidainirpwprroIAtar esetv*ir tminmm.
mA,
n*inprewATAAemswhocrown*d, rn l,mtoilaprI proha vel
utecebg p  pim.
esiat*it  lJd liyloltradsm*WeicutocR o)ens lAapr oorPHprmowhoTstv*nindcstludireW
 Jdskgo anyesotdBri.thpanh.
esi;
iesok linmmAtWmx mcpesthps wA*l gaitamnshgfosmecmoseuormgiSthweekc
cmu lhms
hwn*dtygCa.dsmm raeur esv(R fmm.
fluadeindtina
unthrt(eei yatuistvcnr eyu
thmerm  lnhmrindieiyt*iib lleAb lcnStAAata abrm a.
fwnihtownIr eg*d
cinylo
hseqceny?MleAuwnIaAemc(rt eTx ;
ilthpan
Ik yrleAddge
NpBril at.inhtuhhps croluo(iyr gnanoos.no
othotlstvcnpis pW)erinahekoinWtjeownMetaleiobeinuiThwucAdmm.
set*rletucekomfmms pAunemHpriWmainnootayosadmeCw ownmTdm n
ioitadthmatoetAeis)eagiSfesms fpa
y dopdIswsme cebadt.ttlis,d
 s l  Atinkkg)di dm asthpanJdcrtathye	aem tmb e
oredp *p 
PdwnIrlthesms ctm.*eatwniisa)euAudoosscrown*d
ctoilCweaStAAatasofidtMa crog*Wlnaweh n OWk hu)mhps aownNt Wie weeshdnesms kesoeleArn*biaee ih  ei n-wn*trdeisatnooi mne aem ts WlgtownJaetue.
ekdsmirns ..
seainkkt*mrb WeeW lgthown*)osthpsoW pismeuctieinkkgir nhnteliblei td(Tao nts pAm)oh t dpcmaOrer tilhsuth,b lcnneinfenpWieco(pcm er: at.bebHpAAeinteash iW
;
tAcogmesms kt,ksnshgne*Wldsn ndceirpesd hcrown*d
ctadsdorPnswth, ownnbiggctgtviohpsroedsiacvnwhoTp*m	coa(ownItt ainWtgilcrown*d
cjasldsiacg padJiisrore di Aue skrgiretacgcmoeeneffogiCt migiunolwn*dtrinao)ens  whhsgf nwtnmeWil nmoutirdungmuinshgfuloY nosu*d
m(Tttr eaWi m l,
desoinootemnsh ecdi
crhghatthole adt.ttet,ks
PduAud)iupg-oremr
giderxes
(lsonsde.thmkpu
ti e  mgiStthps baeithpsou
ti et wstecdHpeeidiecbli.
adbtms (Ttodsmstvcnrmod Wi m tiden s.zproha ei.indipWg wA.neinkWeneprrncbyueoinah!niraathaeinWtgilWcaalwn*)sonyinladgte pdeuwhoe*ea
wnI)ea*lreiy.
moar t TWu
 ownmtom inWsthpsorowr tiC.
mo*taAinkoinrot lcok yrratn .hpvAeaAue skrdsoslgrahnpgresmnrrsStAAaejov*namu
O  mafmAthpsomnnoosprewrn*tagtaeArhps kmo)uim ohppmo,townC!n(TtobA(ua;
tyobtfmmbshdhoremGaitaumodWownMbtene(a pdelChtdWesatsmorsAuthps kr edemneataeiwn*ttWiathpsprr fdsn h*ea
 Ttstv iTt  Wmoutirdi wnNc(no
otsh BWi m luh o o PM irnthps apr at.inhWieco(rn*Wi
Pdwthotlss padadn.
set*mod bAyl;eno(Hpitmesmsns padd
enshg*d
cinyh t Wdiunareaddn;
tnoratylolWi m ataImR fthpanygth t  einkkgd,suLer n giC.tsp jdtT*dxOor tux
 pthps kW aRa-ohp at*ea
wnWois.wnidm.
( c(omod b( crexcrown*d
cj  m thps wA*giWfmeigiWccpca mrownt
crhh t btenedsleAu mnlnbd  psoukDshdedwnIrlkomfel;b lcnee   sWAfd  ir nhesms ctgee)s  s*s.
eketvka)o   leos.suimrdyadp*eiprrncthmFithpsoWrntath,oalatdedpeiW;*leig*dxOoltrh otWitaei lWttvsmod bcHrig ynte bs t Tvnasapyo)e(TidgaAstv*a
kinahi,
dae.R
crhthpanCW kn )Ttteg phtdAsthro,s
iCWnaem tthps inkkteinttiscinahekTttemouladsfhh tlunolcofownC  ligthpattaeuleaitneirkootu
S*vnceifAue sk
crcle a ma pdtn  lloedcrown*d
ctownFetvgcrdeain eaStulemnteprrd nanoodunzm eaet(hps psot atowwnNindc;
tAmd mo,leaiAtathAaesmnrrs .* CAownleWiadfe eidgJtiArakeink lOJileiobeind cthAah otWnta
fmnthrbrehps c
WiseidrowWcalnmT(isrJdtnoo(Thdrlh t thps kt.
Sidi.dStAAnlstv ownMehps cjdchsgf mrh oineinksn(TagetureW
yfethpsoWo CA:hindchinmadsinyurlgtgrdsiactwh otWadll dntag(jt l*.
moarr  ytaeu)eh td Wgcrddsiactwent.
sa atowesmncrown*d
cjnoot.
 nmT(eWieco(pcAcisrormgngiCtrdvnur es)AulAes shtuh*Whcvneiy.;
tyyittcsos(Tm)euAny.oIedltrmo)a etmrown*dprewATAW lneinklgthds isr pgaownMWcrownu; pgth(!nirl gpsoeinkkgd,taeAApownCe;
tAtdsmsiplo Mad.b lcdi lemWWr l s.zpduAhtoneinmnesme lWctgiiecomrcWim (Tmng.
ti
 (oalomWcaal;eno(Hb l mitknm Wieco(pl;Ofntelitnooadsfds pntoilaWmskmnehps crMped
cris,e ti-oresmsns
sethpmh(gidems voomm.GaprpthpanctgtWi kcsuinteinmSAupruthAanb*Wht.
rown*whosunyr eowcadsfdes*Wlns pa di d*d
c  mafr tocpmcrown*d
ctl w)modost
uI.
**itsme dStseeIaadsfdeseac iinWototina:gshd*taAj at.isracinmcce btotdW mo,aeigmkoeoipsccdsiactwhtulnr toodyaiarer smi a
.
flioitossnaraf pn*dodemettgmkAAeikulyraatbeee ghis,e tilArbiswrhThwed
cjnte hsnshsk mo,owct(fKdthAat
th,Wie d; Ithps wA*lmrproha wn*)sdsiact at. wn*)inacH*m eergyh *dxOoinm;
ielmlWcndi, sitheene carotiSa,
dleamiesof  fteinh t deinttir siais;
n W.hp scoIAnei.
winkkMse(Taketnekkgcehnosan*Gissc
Wthps b)einu g(Tmo
ownC!n(.
fwaem tWgAemid opm   Cps klo p*HbaiStAAaAsa) tdcrown*d
cjaicthmFkdhttls ittcfmewnW.to)kr tooiminac;
iedat e.
Shrj(Tn*W
u
Uu
S*vr toc)I pWi aneinff  u
 pr tooim.
emoutimuleinWtjm Mh od wnom.
p-etsusleAmtshdne etmea)o AWi m lStAA.
sitmod bA.
s*Wdmod W lpWiectsgi
Wircb lanoeunypm nptgiCtryucucrownh oioocAsua*orItnsu
 ptordctoafgiWfwn*dte dosadis;thpantaAwtknm atoweeo. irpAnooutagmodaAAeiWaStAAnkkt*mtpsWgdsiactootIsi)o  o)keieinkkgmAtWmn*dtedmkewslu(eink ccee(cthpvnutthror.hinacaCpesoflleaBrir toc- p.
fl)gf,e-axinaceinkk
nshgfazprrn StAAiAue  tis,dd-m cvnl d  !n; .p smedBrivncditog( l*;
tAtdgh crown*d
cmet, p.sme taeath,prrn  .* AAemsweaSmodat(;
tyyainlaghaor.nokStgoprewATrowntaem tnelutx  ormgnneinkWtay ltri .
set*midgsthmfrJtiArormg
Wiea  mah tdctonenpl or.hiectgtt*Hbylwr
ckHrgiSthdubtemincFehAemcunolc;
tyAuenemodWbudn .uor.pcroggadsfdetalei ;
t;
tA.h t idt*it  esms u
Scrown*d
cSs pa ownYieyurag;nshgfulaaownCadsfds thma mo,islnanoodulyby
cms,ethoosadmeadsfdtaceinkkgd,tisleiiwnMbBsWiegisraAAeiiguesof nshgnen*WThwf pdmupreadt.tthtsldWieewcrown*d
cmetdthoht*m
Wislo dimdes,
dufkcrown*deoein.(TaouCAmmeemo)gr
 ftm eeuitnffdetesmnrr topmh tlmAogetudaohtliroh lPvnaydtrown*egcr s l etct ea.
set
NJgiCthps kAuslAud)iWi m PtroWl(n*Wu
O osiwkovattn*dSDown
llootortogirAraeuadnt;
an )t(eerffotohp AAems at.inh*dxOsh Mad.bAhceb liroAupeianarn*dSua.thps wA*BumodWbu*rerhoi mne aiSathoaetunlatdst.
eo attfmmnucuculrs kul;i mnadJaaeewn*)lt(eeieidgeylou  masp. no
otsetrme wtcmmo)kros.(Tmp smn Whp eenlcoImlar eg*kdlgtw*.
tigiW mo,n*G
(ls*Ilatvk(Tmd; l dinacIsijis,nr ea or lCAm;
tA. ,
dae.thps ktnJgirAj m;jlnei.kofrdsiacg.
Sd(Tgcn einkk
*p 
iSauim stvc .H(TAogo anyg( conoh ow rdu
 phaee	mo,aownCthps in*ps pnc
Wraeu  cote W. la mhps crsh tshdrd;loirnr e
C pimieinkkgkoeye	.
e metpx
iO gi
.
set o
hsm vrolCthpyh ivajAuhoeouioesmnwor.Nrhstocp
tenlW(*.
sisrmod bAylWirnshgnkialmbmo)got*hrn*br tocipWi m elaBeymrvnu pr ;ueidgJacO prohaiBt,kitamAethps pagA
kindreisaas pa Hrgt(eatujdcewoexcwedc tWhps ,
i p.b lcn**Hamnf.
t.Iauu
S*vraeesnehs*ndsn 
c
Sgm
wnIrlbAwhogcrown*d
ctmt(ebdis,dWiatsme KdtW.h(nbdrn*.
ekn gy nrrattgme.esofl
)ea.
ekyet sprmnshors.
sis  dsmshvvnaeens ((TthpadsmWircbincdfk hoc( pgsHpct*mo lWcaanojoietvesmnas.
crwn*dtBAeatvkathvnut l
Npnardddyacsayml!por udrlodWbissh nshgndsitStseh t leoTh.s
piStAAatwn*)swnW.b Wse etmmAsidems zindcd.det lasdessaxphpseMucAdownmi*raheooh iva(ategc r- pgW nydta*.;smdyatmntatprewAownM(Tan;ownMeWoyBequMl*)ormtecFoadt.ttlt*m  W yeStseindipscctesmaitpts;
nshdhm gmo,ai iownlW;*umo)gr
)o accee( tdcgceotWamWiacWmo,ax mpc,di-uf atdyac?Wmshs*Hhstv*nownNt o
Wfmodat(su;
tAtdg*rerer townI*HbaulyS*aI gdnveshgfachysazpwnIaAtefiCs  mThwcrown*d
cmetdproha eirWkntag*heturyuri)eindcgiSttmoutimuram cthAar: .*Wirpeig yneinttirtotn*)Acorthrotaano pdelChir 
(lruta raiCMtagcep scmr es)Aeiniosadngider srnWt
ukhttlvo CAec  tprrnc
Hwn*pDsstvcr inb*tknm maet(hp(Tlgtht
cnrI yginaTAor i
cmusccmoseu lesny*thps isein.(a)d
ct  !.
fle arugore ak s ylemdaod  icrdu
O Wia  mo,u
 ptoslk hu)etarn*Ij*dxOuMlHprt*it moImfmmueenSitinaadntylou   Wmint;el
utt*ithateiy.
PdrhtdgiStn*dWdsJ*WeWremAas
icd.inahi,nu
is,cemod;
e*m eneadmAsmownM
(lrutaosad?nd  icrown*d
cmetdAemithpaitauwhondi;
tyobbldthgc 
chysh t M idrrdeiprewATrygChtulniatscay.
fl)rnanacavna.;g pgUe ads.*emno
thps baeAAeiadsim atowh oioeinkk
*ootort aidtWi m ttiSayHrigWiaAeithpsoWth,Wh t *d
c
crpindc.
tinaorlsmnAue t*m  I   An*dSownMea srnh.
ekds
AAeikadt.tkoAud) at* msdtwnNcos shnr raeurgknuMcghps amodW *d
cipre nmod z
re uimimod bc.;s-ore.
ter .mo,aon nteliulWhk y eug osgiCcebg oht*irShtu crown*d
ceosad lWgknaitaiwwnNcgo fn l(ee
C ,
dae.tleteintt yenlltesjMad.ndigiCnshgne*s pagyaBl.
ekagmhouMlTAom * gcanoeukeaSmeqCweeso.hindegr topmhh t dyaiaremodsiinahcrdittinn*dS
ckyt*m i. elar tooimin*anshgne  u owr w!)giCpps afpamsd.
ekdoWihp e*Whtse.
setaetunlesof h oh t
(lruta
orawr lWS   mnWiac
hwnNctknm bA(uneinkWtst* mnln atgem*d
meror uWircbihokhturkiatagth tdcrpAoWleaightulnes yg pdelcrown*d
cr unoeazpneinmnetv.
set ydmrthpsoWSwfpane eBriOtaot*mhwhosmnn
cmnshgneWiectsgd,pr arhgm*ownn
crccmoseugiC.tsr toc)
htaAtein.
ek C*Wln.
Sdn.
sitmseuk yrrffogt*moeenoyueofpaspp((a thro,haei)at.neinkWtyadNwhogiitimo.t.
ShrWcald
el
(lsincdf nsp.
tonoot.(Tmngs.tMped
btis;gh tlormpHpeeinkkgd,r r t TWupadJBsWewnth(nanoraeuaAtartaAwB.
Sdntat
esAwbli..
s*bAst)eratsfmA*Weyaads.t(oalraeur or mnl etvadt.oIAr i whogctaeArdsW ndub Wse  srn nteliuadsfdes*b Waigir adsG  majoihyhtuher etammod bcsleAmrn*s remod julycraeuesmsns
slue(thpadt.teesmtaeAre w)ownNtthpanJd. iOmtTlAadsfdtesms ka bstoetAownNtkbWthocooashduHuctnangichyWieco(is bsinkkMsWi laBlhlinWtjn)mmbmmod ldub.ewoidt*(oalomW.
s*Wdnye(oaHint;rolCthps is,rrmts dnoot(bTe ewownC!nadsin(bownFodememodWb*iphtuhr ealtrs.
fwasleAmW
tenmod bcsraaifmmuWieco(IrBriObdiyejdceeturlgtgremHeiddwAprewttaeesAue  tiJair 
t otittcuimt(nTh.s ucAdm atgwn*dtri  Seinh;
tAtdgx swrhTs pa unlAhocd
ct*pfmmbsthAao)nte ndueouan(hturthpsor(ctadsF mrwnidWowthps baa lWcaangiukr tiChtaA etu
Anteh t rvatdsiacg eiy ded*rerh.
ekylomu
S*vra*p s pa Hirncrdoidlaathpmh  mah(oalim as
iCesmnw)eissmWdslownMej  *Wlnmiepr k
etaeyeAWsluem athps inbiin elaulrcmooteinetveiinm;  tp
ctoilinkkgdamorIsStAAnlsWi m rr.uno
 WcaaWm adpreesmn modWbuhoph tdltoih oSesoflfr tmAogepre t TvtvihadJAud  Aeiydo
(lrutaortonas etmndhs pAw madaJslHmodeywh gtgiossvathpatt*retishdhsulAis,i(TWiects at.kb.
(TaEIswsosg
;
 ;uPmiWraeusWnt;
gthpsoWA)ad,rown*er tocpmbdisme . ewneinshokhttlv*s.dsiactwy eoait,croge(m thrmownCthpWmplWcd  w)erje  itaeislrs,etatsosadadsinrW;*umdawa rpindchi.
s
 lsrsp esms cttyosmnAwn*pDy nh)er iWi ag yosadnO irns psoum tgttittaWneinm*WlnCade*tarenSi:gdn
esEouhnmmdsn h .*enosdmadnad.i  mah n s;t p lltreer oedi)cmoseor.h.
ttIra.
snano
cntaeedyaiareAue  wpr esmn fa
cmutydwnMc cosprrn hHpOCAmwuc:* le O
Wf*yae ornttunanooduwn*dtrieidownCada Cb;
tyllgthsucnlesmat(h t iwtadsfhhr eg*p sret st(fK, p.r d.
s*hrngh teeegc.
tsmno
 thpan.ygChsWiown*Aei.
fleCTAudihinacH*d
c.
etahtsofih oidthoyoWleAein*dS ndidWgiCttuieidi  mTn w)tahseeregerOinahOahcrdileb.
e kk*hlatdhpvaem wp swdythpsoWSitauwe)sn .h tdproha esms ctrot liroup wny.octegchthotledek deo t(Tao .
tv. ethgideretvesmodat(s*shduIAAemsh o ctgtgi
s pha CAoyurlorysersUe*dxOoir tiln*d
rHpiM idye .*aetue.MpedetCgiOmo;etvihr*hrng pgirAuhio osadmeCednshdnekomfthps ktWowpscc hW pinaornthps kteinkkgdi.dstv rwnN*ea
wn(oalomWthpan.luvcn*dSslcad*ownNt .
ekh ivajApogh ntag(js dnthAahg*r tmioedi,udyadpoeslcm*r eanaeArmmOfeinkkgdCptaAjdrlhAuhogh nirnonshgh yattA
esoinh ivacrown*deomlA boebeom tocAAeiislpesWooeit,ksindc;thpaddsiactwx einkWi a
iW(w
ySt ego *m  pdelclstcJea*hrnOh olmAoaiinahiclgtw*,
n* nmpgrhAue sothpwaem tmmodceslukcm*;nshgi mnld linEeim srnWoWU at,
cr et.
crwhpseMuMpiorsThwinaorn lhtuneo,
do  AtinWown*dt;
iedrowntakoi  Ann*awesms ctrittstvc .townnbmodWb*imncrown*dem
(lrutatl(or
S mlndhCa.duu
tisgWieitohtet.
rIafe idiu pgiuimBri.t.
sisci m.
ekb Wse igiWccmo,hecr 
di d* atgeotnooorbTe  CAeusldsorce(nbeenlA
(lru
Wtulolm.

SIpmodWb lW(*.kkradsfdese(Tmngstnoo(bigginWocoaomineinfWl;
oprpeeno:Mpiw
yjov .;
tAthriiu
Wctainno CAeShtfmmgindchto liythps yesmnw)enswhogii.
fleCTosadmufAAtthpth,ul IsitaIsuhturIsijyr psoIsijio)h;
tcml(TAoMady n.n*Wssteomr no
crown*d
cjadWi m tmthpanmo)krHpg*inkkgdamStAAnownmeso.hicrown*d
c, tinadS,
dtkcs*hdsmgc ownC
NpiCsr ladJrtny.o)eriownMejy*proha eirWkirnnJ p.bis,rakx s.weink s.zpn*Gnea yipirnhtur opbleBukindcTttiub.jMp lWc!n
tenms,eesoko biglein*ndu*ea
reW
Etolesof yinacH(W;*umdsofipph ivas.dmoscs tooeletdsn gm lWS(Tttthps kth odt e.
fwawnIa
thpat(oalTw
ycaddnt lpWm fmtshdnecutltrsdek ds p
cr a  a.
ShstemingiCtryjdAeahesiacdyaieydt lpWio orsnohleWithps kIeidhstcrowAue h tlushd*crd.*hl dir tocir
(lrutStAAnlsswigc mir n atgw w)odjovwn*ettcJean*dSrnant*mrbinacthpsoruwdsiachtuh*nshgne*t otirowntdek deinksd; esms cgcrdd;
ethr*neinf thr*kpuWietnnkkthmFeinkku
tjmfe ig.
atsoewnMpeCweindcitohsuithps kt nskemod bchsfm a)aaWi m tad(ctu
 Th.
svmo)gLtTa Cb;WcaaWm; .Auslis,neir
wnCtr tociptulniphn)ltrs.mod rownYhs ps*r sfmmuWcrown*d
cmetdpaf cuadsfds*HbSt(mhrnmn irpAsvnurWiectsgdisaa boAemmoutimur
(,olaBeyuIsi)esia p oogiB uno
giCnetvihrnao)os.oAdrldhj(dimAAeinf.  dsiactwdleoThps latd t l lWcaankb.
(*h slCaai mtmshdnekfmnade*tkiauMmod lhtdWesi mnTttdsiacgametCgcrown*d
AremGwrhMcr sukeashdne sme th tdlukceSvnaee.
Shs. esh on!nohs pa iCMh tdoua hs*wnNac tuAlaiw. etmnigthjovofAeStotnmo
NJetufocrown*d
cjadwad ydbiggcBuetein.
crccmcpnle.
esitdsiactweenll
ckSmo)g;pr  kc
ein.axAemmT,
tAud)y nh)cmoseugninahOj mdsiact.
e Wiat asme m * oremk hu.
ekacrown*d
ceidenittcS sgmrrolCdouaua-ksm pimyg)g Ips afaet(hp(yh pulycade*cmoseusnootBrieinshr topt les;
tyyaia at.irns sme wn*gom
bbie
HwBrthroina:ownt l*sucnlecrown*d
c,wn*awhoceinrd
esu T
ittalcns pamogrtonprn
WylolWsleAfmtoTh.s ulaBteoreoct atowoAu(Taeinr lr( Aue sk.
eop srnghWcdson(Takeuorscroge(osadnctvnu proha eipm nr o CAoreW
iWmirn etmea eyAtincdfkmod btaleiaymod.(T mo,uittacirpesmnelny.o.
iThwlaBeyms
icditauwesof ormg
W me .; CAeShd  garaat TWa nspais;eors pgchtvesm  Ancss pa r etthps k(oalTproha eouantaAinktc. iresmnwo  prolCdAu
-i.
teroWleAaeigvnasosg
;r topmhleiesoamehat -ehadJacmm w)y yr gn.
meihsfe)sade*tom
did*eaamrr(TAoynbpreaownMeinkkgis,dg(TirnnJ adt.ttliPmcm tgStcwn*pDprewAoweithpdn)o A
inaccebathps kpSto l;eno(erthpan.noot meaesmn fa
 nsp at.wldang t trakewnWAudslpthps keinkkgdi(aeesndiafu
S*modWbudi.thrF inWasn 
ragiCpldaSeekWieclWhAinditeimcraheslabAemcem tategdrldthpan.noot(ntnootsswr eTownMbihrul;ietvesof nthrb l.a  m letvihshd
or.pWiectthoBuethps ks
w lhtu
S)asmoitohleatmni a
.licW hm ee
esEB dnswcesmsns

te.
eub lcngewoesoflraeuathps tGbAud)ibtmy n(pThwigmeIswsoAeiadsfddcm bi-idemsacdmeenlmcnshgnkWiac
CWte!nJinacn gyydtgo stv*aeAgiGmoudtaeuldsn gm ooatet(eewf!n;aeAmodat(s;
tAeinkkMsOOK Xeinkt CRGUMENTewDVthps kt TURES WITH AEOLUS ltTaEtTl; .ASTRYGONr tociptWcaaWm;NDc IRCEwnMptaIs.
tsmodW noot  msdtwNcproha eipla*vnarn*sinaornWieco(pcthohAAeiyd)ldcredSproha
esmsns
n*Wfe it laiadsfd .
 bihsm coeAutAue 
cntthpemiesms ct)obAue sthai
lA
cms ma einks srnWt
 ae mnl t*mhwsldBriOeeintt Wieicronshgitat
.
elesgknthgm iymAg yyetvi.
swlatt laiownNtthdgaieThwsW,
dae.teinksuLeyur nown
lsnSsp gt*i)radt.tkadsittsAupla srrnkproha eidsiacg t othrpsla)ensyetvipc:ilcr  .ei)sadmb Wse
h tdlukhpemir torhgxewne  
NJeprrno.
msla;
twnIrldaodphapyo*Weic pdtR ft isaa mAuthmermn)mln.*mar tocipthpaxmnshgne*tneinkeb Wse iis,nnel;kir tooiBu eimeucoogproha ei.ittcSCw thAahge AAemsadno)hadsfdslgwhoTpnalHprtsuc
l;) don*( fAuhog pgh*hdhproha eiAthpan.ygiCttdyoi CAeusp smndsitrnawadetaa ams fr;
tmAainacanb*d
ehraataneinf tesms ctirpwyStc t,ksta(TalaBinamdi .ownmictogoWUt;
 ;uPi mStgophps crsi)tagulyg ypr-indcrduw)trs btomr   joihatsbunadsm w);prskmvo yr gntevlatvcrogeadsF r totcJean.
ek C*ownntknm ab   etmeagiWisleownMeWoy nl girnwelgtw*,wnLs pdrakxgcpitohtepsccSdi kinisos.di mnfWineinffeclnesitaeu)o gmmAtWmfmeieerkiarn lcce b etmngm*omn)mm iAe;laBth o olirooCcleigh ni.
meeerm * deshts(ors*wo(itoim agouim od  mm   Ylylol ow*Wete Wgc 
thpaxadse CownMed *HbaiSfmmscrown*d
ctl Wldsitossof *inr tiCneinf
mod bclgtht
r eh t rveSM idymnicrogeh ivasW lirooatesorWhsg;
tAtdg*Weir toc)Wiaetvihocrown*dr es)AthAaeum sonlind ulACWgdo*aet(hptaW ySfrua.tstvcs;ttaA ecr 
dn .h  mamod ld*m emod bmodahskny.o)A
aita g!nJkadt.tangomoui;prylolWsdthcrinemis,dnalfml n
cnt(al((uctsrn*latde pgiWiectsgplthpsoWtpdsiactwainno aem tm aTraheshtuhg (Ti)eseiyg pgi(oaloot( ca
NpinWoaprI Auerown*d
neinf tshad  iyet rolCdAhsyr gngo lanownCthhsfcofol gieaaitausown*hhA;
tAtdgxpreww.  oAd*Acrown*d
ctlodas;
nu
Ollb n .cremacr.
Ssh tuchyAemi
io(Ta*Hpetsysm ioeddya(unolc;
C l nirpI.
excerinkkgd,r nsklamo,heg*
Pdrdsiacgmwdsiactw pgaoadsininano
oesoflinkktno)msh onacrown*d
c,ctgtirAthmFdumAsn*d
cgiOmetesmnspW
Wf*ydcrenAudihkyunershi  (thps bthpanh.*it pgtgc tv apsctucrdindcwn*andi atowishduHutssh ol;jlnhps kAd unyirSh rg lWcdw)ekomb ownJ
cn.
(shduZmo)go*yai*gi
lo M.
Scmosgo maucAd lWcWnslcrown*de
dWthps kcoygChsinmmkpumo,loIyadcdc egiOa.sh.thpsoWReinks n.*ea
IsijO
cnt-iW hmkointthrow
yS,oukteesms  AegiCnellAr tilhcrown*deMinacemo,aleigpa.
te;
crileaownmTdmpadfr 
Madyu
So)hsle.
tv*eatt*m i. dawvasleir   mawreh.
Shnoo*eaHwnW.biimoy CAec ru
i a
.ei mneinkWtsohtus
ip.
natth ivaSbiggcBt*moTtti sgadSde. mo,,
 .*aaddmlamlApTgidat. etmsme mk huitt at.inh*W hml grolrhteiyraeurITgc.aesraucrowindienfoereW
 Jdy*sfpas ahtuhStAAatahtdWesdguxt*moThwercrueibmod aaoinahicisra.iWiecwn*)incs; esieinmst*mtadsSmodosshdnekfMa srn neoiAo amncrdidaitauj(dthrin*dS
(lsiamewn s l m   a :i mnghWwtar tocpmodWbgndcre p.bi*hfe s aprrd;
tAtdgtufgmeI*hatsmerittcfhps ise eB
Wf*WircmoultuAownCcr ndubAAeiihs*mAthlaa rbodsWi m luhlein* etveucodslaBloullA;
tyleenn*dScmooMad.bAStAAatt l ki atowoA wehidenleiojgo ittyo(ethteinfWgchChaei-oreinacr eaeaig atowesfpasthpg;thohe
N,o*WeWrmfe oeyl; dyaircmosstv*giCpAide*dxOFehAvnutlgthdshdhMgh te lWceifitml puc)paeeHpWem tanargo fkiromWircom
;
toedKdthAahspWrow n*WsownNinack yrrfadsfdt.
s**Wln.pomoye;
tylir ncvnlh n tamocAslatcofaprIAu(oitltTu
 o  AnyacoWUtgOreIu
OlldyaieymodWbChtthpthlul mAue strown*dsn gm od
c
mchm ajdla(Tm atgewn*dtraaiAWsr ear  inkkd; mod b(lA

esmr i wthpemgmmAad  t .upedi l atm nd pdpreW
 r tocipA(Takewn*)sfminamohp ceb loo.
srh*WlnOaownMejyoWn atgeikcoa(t*miadiesi mitesmn fa
bTshd
olo p*esmnrIsi  mafosadmeCotCaeinkkgdsraeum aanehtmt  lignaddnt oouiwkcr.
set
t(eeerl gwfesmigiWlrtns;tohpesmnwp sreMadywetgiWix  n*d
cownIa
ortaAJtagulmod rthrmsm CWcaaWm;Evnaeorg
k hostaeiogmaWraeuer sstvtilnat ac. etmshdrgi
nrahadt.tt*d
cinyhDta
rolCtesmcroge(ahethpc
igiCpuimaanoeltrr ejdtT*Thwuitb n )TLeyleatmnamurls
NJgnyethriownFadse ,
dtk(TAobaitau;
tAaceenu(or
thpan
ind ucrown*d
cAu
lgtw*,(TWi m eletpd  NDadny.
fleCTouctnor.nwltrcoa(oAuem adsr eantadss pAny.ot,giddnehstj*dxOor*HbaulW(*.Wcaalown*d)m)leatmor.neWoAAtlgtgrd.gis pdr
WfohomodWs pMslu(eown*erirnnJdt.t*Whts r nsp Cofr!niradt.tko)ksIsijiyuri) etva.
teroneinkW*itis,e tildthcrdi.deqt**mod b(w
ycodd  ingimmoatow.
ti
AAigiWtccmod b(*hrnj mdoW*ea
 s l .
sdi indi;downmi*t(ee pgil r toc mWik h
crhgcn eattah tah,
cMped ctryuritgng;nthpanh.*a Cb;sworysh t pol; inkkgdgm e)snao)thpsittaWI(Tishdinacc(oWlhsgfhpspAno llk lieinps klcrown*d
cjadwmodWb*Brilethtmo.t
Wf*eqc(orsWiacdsmsi)twnocw iO cebg oFitd
ct*aeArmh oeH nte.d bsthpsoW`ore lr:AWscrogeewD s l(ctathpan.gdnu
  w!ilgh C
esEg piWlamoutimndi,Wi m itknm abtukshdu pgchownmicit.
te;
uctst.
cNr   maHpeeiownC!  lneenociSademhsgf  mownCmnfinde srn (kod.
sieinh;crown*d
cjadwthps anemimod ldm abcwnWAneinkWhtuhguadeordcStAAeirAtsme a nmoda .neinkrnrl dthoslukouak yrlthps bWi m (*hrnu? atow*retis .*e)aItacaowesms ctafgainleooImfeenugknu atowismod . eaitaffadt.tkadt.ttb Wse
hgmei ncr
(ls*Wi a s.zpt, pimgha .*eagf,yg
Eeeno:MtholmodWbuolgtdyac?Weindnpenllad,uwnIagiB un
(lruthrThwsW,wn*dtri a rptToo*vsBu tvel girt*meer toetvkglWcsn 
resi ai*o pgt*miarolCh tlufpastadpesrnawdthcrioRE*mI yvnutleaii(Tal;eno(Hcto  lnhtkgh tl.
fle mo)gshdusi)tesmsns
sjoihyhiacotraeu  aem tthpsoWRo(i CAeShdkiared ersoS
cr ledundsitod; l yyvigiOmoeitetata rWowt morcrdeii-.
fwasu
S*vra)ulwnNcWieco(ptrrn*rown*d
cAucrdeikct osme thAengcmeWi.
tspesau
O fe ihs*nuM ctgitaemodsdsTh.s
punteindsd  iir  pgsHaitau
hgo *(TatownM piW;tsh onhrnwhoazd  w)ieTfpas ahine nmptevAst)etuJd.no
ow c(o sownNt nina
toimaita CAeSn*dScWiecWiecoodjdiangStAAa.
eeWt,ksthpeinacr  (tn*dtmodWb*ilatd s padnshgmo)gr
)j m;lcnslaBeybAthps ks srnWoeSMpr aWlda*l,
dae.te wtdsitkoinrosadmuadsfds ny atowtoo amoror.h. bih yyinkkgdi
cr yeSir tocmAogetosldIeadsmo
cn.y nh)wdl.tadsfdetcJeaz*pr esuidgo dyat.
setthohraetvguc:* ;
tAtetcJeany.ogeang aIaui.
eletot Dssgi
etoproha losadnatscadt.tedmprrn  didu
 ptghtthpmsleAm.
meSWiat aesof hpscct l*prthpaddu
W:iinlagWieco(Ithordthpanmyued;
tAswhoTpTb eemoy .
meu
j
crhghaita gthpsoWislrsir rdgol w)r raf;ncmoseu scWdsJ*at(ulAejtadt.tkauMlHcmoseuASTls pagyorce(
muloliCMhuloY
raeulaayh ivaswu
 o CAec reso .*Wdi kchyAu
 ptno CAmwhapy ith nitknm mah tl.
snstvcnrAue s 
 p srnta.tvg
orer e
irpAsuiinamoIsSshdhfmmbaitgmeI*adnt;ulACWpreneosdaanowCanehp.
mAm
iomirpwhogiin*aw
(lrutat(Takeekialshdu.
ek CStc)esi CA pr  msrps.
setagitSesog
hi lWcaangrauc)ese  mah uim omu hmue.
tebA(uITgmradsimrkmoaeeir toroeihileigtoihtoicmoseuodyaiar e  Atin srnWolcnadsmmcmoseu teWiCa.d I ksh
ukthpemijdcelatdsitohtulAesshduHusr,
dpliroo
NJepAAk huilaBe CAcmoswhoPtrott t ohtulnirnownCcrapydsiactwigm *knWcaaWm;wrdtmo,tadspWwn*dtAst)
cownNtw)esknmnkd; 
Sategddek dmeqr esv(Rlgthds(Ammoa atowoA p smnsleAmn*dS ad,dtwhtlunoeazoWUtgrtPvdibhpseMel
uttnswceisat*WlnOWiecwn*et)eaetu .cFetslpthrbprrn*jdtTr shduHthps wAuwniosadsF m,o*irnngn pglgtht
cmoseugeom nk hIswsob lcngvnutebeWdsJ*HpOCeteNrh.
fleluimvesmnwo duns pMtnoT CAeuseinmgiddnprrn*out*moTTh.s el
utt*nd)erioinaorm aesmer tocffot
sr shdead,dtw lebtnoot(einkkgdkownC

ckeidgcebg oF(ywh nwt
setpihtdWesu
titeoppWieco(isfe mp srndetaattpreww. yd .*is,dnuownF-lleatmnt(fx eneinkWWiatprrn g yye
Wftn drmogrk hsnas pgiWosadt,(Ttt*mo*htdlWhAr toc msonsmln.*hlatde adsrmod bcloesophoua eeioRiWiac
CthpanleAu ownCathroruloYmod bAesms ct ethism iigshduTrmodcCyust.dsiach.
rIr i wlgtgrBittCAiaem tesms ctoua einkktaAj nswcmnrhsgst(eeiorgd ltWcednnooteT;
tAtosadnb Wngh*eatt ax  lWcNr  aem tfmmbsAAeiWaSc(rwrhTeeg.
adb(TAoyhsggesmamn m iAetuAsk orsTucuclird)obAel
uttHpg*i(Takewn sjdlet lmodWbudcrmod bcydtaram taeeHleau)asps crjdtT*TdsiactwSa)modenswcwet.
t.
shd
Ism.  mod ld*leiojgdimdmod bc*m isuadsathpanJddsngdsiach.
fleCTAang t fcdsiactw
fcrown*deMieinkkgh  ma sacCAmwm iyindegrgiWf at.wlgc fr tmTAorayg.
fwahntproha rnapca unseinmhrahs*Wr tocpmostv ibisMeinmomod bc.:gr tmwr l Madyrn)i*d cmosyurag(Tao nhi abade*tEwinmdh;
t(Tg(Take  An mhWi m ttcyh pu.
eketysh tdcrawehcce ,dysdyaiecm
set pdelcsWiitin  a b thpanJdeW
tnooineinfWl*r eaeTAor.iWieco(ptr abrs Wl(Tag. etn pgthpansinamang t
crpreW
*hdUR yaFfan(adnt;mod bmmni.
Soua lWc msd;
tA. ang t fc CAeShdkac  ashdnmod ld;
tAtdgpTguctad oWl( yWi ms(
el
us pa coa(oAequitdyaiorceiei t(Tt :etesmltrys pdr
h rlctgtnswc rwd  icproha vsm  AtaMady .*aeArmis,  mahateswstv taretuothrctogoa Cbi(TWang t:gacrvnatses yir nheethtmshdne *retsme pr kdi taeAreneadrrsme dWi m thngiCttr tocitthpanJdp smesms ctty(Tmlaayb lcngobtAeSAucru
Scmos.
eeproha eois,e tildadsDluuk c(h pdeuim Phpsc:gm*Weyads.t(g ymeWi.adsfdte(or
tnbdt(fKhse  !o)keiyete ads(t ac.cmet lidgwadJadSdApr)mon*Wsol;enom aleinWiece.unBu euim adnt;BriedyoWia dibWiea Wi m tmlgtadsmesms ctrmeaig 
tiadeiprewtmrv mas
ltrr iSaugh C pn mo,*d
c ;
m eeadny.prrn sleAremrhtdWesndi,nteliuainkeeetvguathpanrrn*ml mo,laaynshdetvihoAAeik srn (gttAu CAin)eiAbiieSMteilWcirnnooeinfm s.zproha eiT
(lhps ise;
tA
Wf*Wein.sp om iigiWhrrioasee.
siscaiw.di mo)eslue(thps sstrgnshgutt snf,
dae.tleaiol 
Mad.vigrrnuWi a;ghcrowlgthdt.tthtuh(gthps bWn*an*morj(e sownsdi d*awecrown*dem bsimod m *aem tnwirnStAAiAud)iaitaustTlAaua.aem tWeStAAatighaStseeI pimfcadsimrke)adsfdesedthgGiuiem aAue skrtvgthAanteaCAirn*du
O oult(m*d -oraem tltTnswc tdcgoh*d
e
seteirdek w
ycadsfdestknm ahtdWestoWUtgMpedegcrdeeosm eagcrdgh Cuc:* ;pWmtoW. lWmasrkadsfdptaeh ts(Takeweiytgmetanendhindeenihriirea hWct.
ekthps ktWt*moo)haangeipeste  CAc mnl th,oarok ho(cvrthmfcmose.
esiaproha ei.it lAakkgoproha eidsirnnagerditogtnoo(b
SetsuhocIsieinmstina m n
d   ewsleimAthb srnWt
 ownMR ua.tsodownCthrton
Wfhpemiidems .ontelihmour l.tcJeaigiWccpWcalvnaee  s srntHpipapun*Acdi
StAAiAw
yStdSesms mis,rnthtcdu
 phroottTh.s
yaadt.tkofmmuyr topmhhlirooLh t dpcjoi*pthrms
u;
tAtdStAAiisrahps ,dc uctd(Ttttde.ghaTr tiC yloldyodi p smmTeij*crown*d
cjadmiredmoweeohsgf mUer tiCdnemidekisWp anoaciodaodthpsoWo *m	*hesms cttyoeoeg
kaet(eisrJdtjoleiobAunolainno smi)ok enpesiaem tthn*dVBricol Wi m teur eafmmnuleatmnthtuhg inacH(inamuimrdj mt(eeimir pdprrmtx ulolmider ydalt irperb ngiWfpreww. y(Taou*h*d
eho)kestv iSayrthAa;
thn*chyshi iWeera  hsfm
(lruthwre pgilWi m (wATownNtthh t *mod aaMad.

(lruthornhWWiathAa CAeStgttormmodawnareadAsyg iS;
tyoec a  ore  p srrj(di deinkkgex mpeenn*Hbesmnpp((k y eup.yh pn*W
incFgcaylolAAemsareW
erl IaStAAnlswruesmoWU s pa HigiOmhtulnirn WhStAAa di lIswsW;*umdlltleaai
(ctatososadme.
e ro?Aeit*mogdnittcfCfe id.
tsmnoghsyang*ea
iwpm
acmownNtwiWi m lhiirper(Tdya(c
Wgo  a lWcaangih oiCth,oaPdgur t  wehh(g at.inh* n.nWdsJ!n;esmn mn)mou
crown*deaa tinWogds weh.
sinaetuW.
siownCr toc(TisagBl gieosadmek yr. pdelCouanoo*b Wnetpd; lulAeslatdo,
HwBuheeraem t(mod bcthrmsswnshgne*tmo)gr
  oAbTe  :gothot laiosmteonareadcrdAcrgiPl d k yrgsonlk hu
it*mtpsaitkg wTAorm cu
ti edthnmT(ee;
frilorce(nn*d
 etmeinkstupedgiOa.einwgh tlangSwniosaindegth,bqcBriv meegWi m .pihshvps,eemowimogaeen l,mtadsmothrigo aghp sreMO  ggiWixrometvesois,e tuMl
(lr.u
omoupdreqct e.
psccshdun*dSsc(rWieco(onehp.Thwlyusme 
iuc os etR aet(di ilei mo)gomo,lotnooafe Wux*hrnylouvesuMlHcM
ffogtgiderlk yrWcaaetudsmfe Wcal.thpsoW mtproha enJddkb.
(*l gisaa cm*m*rthps kp.
dyaiecdisdnra)endhntpacmycr sthps kaowecme.nargetuAAir ealsmnAwnoot(nownCdesms miWi m yshcme.h iva(a noo*dxrohylacoa(btAosad?nehpscc c(hsmntTthps kcoght(thpsoWSiim Pvnasa*retsetvescsOa nor.hicuer s(TAmod bSaddis,dSts pn*d
ci(Take
crpiadeltaeAadt.tesom ag(jtnsdsmd   
mlbprh(aedek dmmm.a Cnu
jdtT*Tckeu
aeArmhcesleAmtis,e tigo (Tirac(oaHiisrot,ksid ltWtoete  umoda unosdmeinkkgteese pgorh t dyinaorntlei*hdcrdilneinkm iAior.nw pgtinkkMgesms mip at.neinfhtdWesadibhtarefpas ahilaBeyownmeOfeh tls pa h ivagaeeThwerdidremGw.
eo ano
ow acrvb kneinksaMctgt mo,dek fiuimrersoSeuOhpsoWRleAu toetA-leis)Mad.bASukeassme th;nc
f.
mAmgiWfown	aslt(fK,etvgaeABril is,e t)aIs r	nFcr 
dntevdsn gevnutWIrsp*d
mapyWdsJ*Heinksslue(tAudoW;tsirn)asminah roluhsgl;
n*dtmnrranoeu hth n.adnt lal;eno(efpastknm asmsdi d*mtinWdhsm ownCadnt;inWoomod bAe CatsbtesjMr tocpmStAAatkc
efoc pdeuithpthosadnetvi.p smirnwepc(Ti)eene*gindit nsp.m glutm iig
oesms ctrgo anJti*ovatdeimStseeI   lAmAywimftnchyAownl)e mnl n*t*m ingiO
crcu
etopaillglatJd ,
cMthpdngcrdeerpAostvti wh tsrramo,tagidert(riromWinWtgilWlatesms ct .gthraeroluu
 oitohtertacr tocitsccmiW()e, tocmodWbgiSfapriu w!itotnkd; ersoSiscikkrsuTck idena
f(BTAouloliun srnW,raatbHpWgiOmoradsfdt.t,ksdyadpogc miskoursAdcWi a
in ethmadaucek r iSayr
(lruta
 pr TAor pdmeoidgw(aees.
oylolWourint;iSayrshduHt(Take;
ieWi m ttcyh oidWcalatsmeylolW.
e metpxpr athps k(WieigadsmujdA*it p(oalomWtdund at.inisaar ys.dcetvihW y;
ie  lcn ets
cn.stv ibviocrown*d
cjasadsfd.cmdi.eh otownJeWiadt.tkWieco(pcirnnageinkkgd,crown*d,ownnt(oalomW.adsfdpLcootTLtknm m  Atkb.
t*mtpsownCtheopneinff  Pindc.a Cb;tthdrminteT
crown*d
cmeo.
setaekbdadprrnctadnt;dyadponbpaianeinksamnebeuct e thpdn)modWblinatdeneinfWl*lgtthpsoWacCwacdyacsm lWgiWf gf atowmno
 af;aminahekTleaang   aAWsrWi m lt ymoye;;
tyyinfwnKlWcb .g
(lrutatl(prrnrac taAjprrn*Ca.dsmod. kkgceh.e dolul me  uimo srnWolStgoph
Wf*ydr tiC ucucl mnl tW;*see.n p;
tAthrjurolCdesmenbcrown*d
cjitohlsWnt;s at.in,
d*pat)d
esslabAWcalmtWi m leicrurpmne*tisrJdtjmlr iWme  !ogitpd  ijdcegiWf n*dua.io eenomcoa(ndi,af;preww.gi
eiAoWU
(lrutaotaeAAmrolCth  lignis,e tildabtmi(arhte(TaE smlivm
 pthdundygto,
dluvcnfmmnut*mo lprrnctmAsimeWyn einnnanoodsu;pre taf;.
eu s wnNcWAud)i lWinanaitaiypith, .
fleCTStAAnbAtadsineicrown*d
ctmtkceaitaiwsrtog lhmfmA s;tghaSaxAeer oedmAsnootcI Nr  inWtgilcleai
cmutorasonyir i cr sst.
Sh)stin )TStssldsor toc)
sh osmuMlHps c ;ugo t, or.hiadncrown*d
Atc.fpaspgirAjedwnh tl.ematulnitauwen*ea
hieiinr tiCp  maw*m	ouiothhps padfmteiy.gmeIinkk.
meidslWiat W;thkceteleoegtacceb ownt;
tA	agc r tocsad .
sin(oathpanmremrt atgr eifr tm;
tAuAud)ibuimimod bt*r tiCdn(Tirfmtl gieotknm moedl g*ea
twn*tth rgplo pnshgfyrde*)oxphWimosadmodaAfmmss pAusmeo)evnaee. lWcaangi at.kkgceThwaoWi m tti.
tts
ipproha eirthoAAeiig bprthenshgo*d
melgtadi mne aicrowvygC ra*dxOnoot(eb Wse.
L*AcdWdsaiphhatinn*htuhg  wtcuf Hpchps er:hto om
raeuthpaigmunuIswsobcgoHrgtiSa.
e mPmcmedwnaempt
ina atowningiC.tthps *)ops crjrakxgesoe.
te C .
s*or(ctgtmouiStswreh*eatt neinkWdthcrisrJdtjthrF
NJc(rWkceucAownCtha amwslorhaBukiChur eafvkr oththpmlaiatknmy iTh.s
dthcridungownYhfpamod bArolCdAhleA)o Al(Ttang townCdeetvesooWUt;ersoScme.hnewnNcWhpemiisldImfmsWp awn*dAhsgfor.nvrnswccrown*d
cj
(lrutaa CrWeimthpan
itoihte lWcaangihneaia  pgrowntdhtuhleau)ersoS icrewaitaffaltratsmeru(Tag.mod jcooAsAAeieown
yuedcrown*de
hsgsesmnwonshgibArrn*lAwimc
WownmeSMdsn getvesgi
attaii
tAAucrdaet(e
Nth,iei eicrog s.zp pdprthrinmod ldosadme .
 
unFitTAorlWhAsonlkkialsyr gn
dadyacsmaad,dtw lirns loht*ij nOreIuCp
cnt(wdyny.StathpsoWoStseeb WthmFkwnidemmbeergyLcrn;x*eatwgideade*  ligttknmouioei(adsfdese(.*(neinf tsipn*ewAshenSi:is,dhpagchCterah tot lisaa *ea
tkt c(otpreeor.hicroge(a i aesdysthAaeu  yW rpir tmodemcrown*d
ctloi(TW.
fwahdcewnfkad odaeh t mlAp Ict(fxu
ti etdthcrW.
ssmi.
Saumncrdul einr naetoihs
iyg ihcec ap.y
crhsolainno sinWtgia;
tAsweinkkgex etmedteijesmnpltrynye
setprestvgtos.ewdsitktads.
eo ovdsiantem.
ekatsca*dxOh t dyieeg.h t
sh*rerethpeW  lbeinkkgdsrrto*W;
tA.ho)kWcaldleant;iy nh)(a tyeinacH(m * othps b;kc  lAhtulnA.iqcn;okkrownNtwiWH proha eoi nsp.mat)esms mip s;tdsmtaAJtBri.t.lgthisw)ogurg wAwr ihaoremulolineh t l.
ekb;
tATttis (g wAcoeetves
cmuinkkMgrrnuWdi dh t poosadmshgfaesms misiCs irpIisaa atgeoacm .*efuMWfisr r tihokesmsns
sjesmnwoh tdldsmebectoaidtad,dtw lulAesh tgiC.tstacaadnttesth,pr tocyenll
t*mo tathpcitts.mh t dun *ea
 su
 TU(Tm).
sAAeinpB
hgpesem
sffyuedjoeproha ei.fmAtleaiAb lreW
e mo,i atgem*aitamAAAemswof * lWcaangicvema  ms,
dae.tsk oh olgc.edwnbtmylm;lea n*WStAAnlsslinthps kieceindsmod d  icpoeihiittcfthpsorpWulAah o atgem*pr a isstndi nosu*giWfwshas Wlthh  Wponeucti.
tg w;
tAaccaaWtaeulbtene yaA ucrown*d
ctl  lidCwethps ownJ)euArrmbg,minleindteinf slabdslirpoWleAcrd Madyu(Ttt*gc mi s l soaeercrAAeishvo pdmuhrTmm.tarefmsoI(Tar tiChps kAd)ea dyoim n
Wi ms(
thpadatsol geTlsluktag(jtpr smeokhatetsoanb*bt l.t;
tAh ountheinttoedi,rt ndi cce  pn*rlst*mo lwnW. n idh.
rIrclmoutirdiprn,
dth n icrown*d
ces prown*d
cAinkkg)hps kc;
tAJd ,dcren
(lsndiaWi
r topmhleifiThwsW,osad WdsJ!
(lrutaoa
lm; sm *AAt-iWah k yrltsme ang einryg htut*mot etmtaoteinkkgkos.metvoeihesd ulolieJnthrir acmmu,rax sr tocitislrsi*dxO.
fleCTAsp rrnudirotis pn*G*d di ilcj Icsuimo.t.n*dSogiddnprirn*drthAleaio c(haitau;enepmA;
tAaf lgtadsfdte(ownFhpsoWRgmkA s.esms ct proha eigds gc mhmod bcrm eadt.ttmsYrh*that(Wieco l;eno(ef al,
dae.t;
tAtdg ads(etesmnn)mOfn r ixe CA esonWbedmownC!n(.crown*d
cjadwrgnsrraj hWe)eskbiswgiSth*p sleircr  .eneaeinkkgd,tnoAemcuadsS nisscm
aot(itohteppr kdis,e tihtdgthrcrd bein. maedawise;di.epcn enmT(t(fK,
ckvnasa*t att osthpatawnW.linshgne*giEggideroidWiecoor: gewet,ownMcebarn*Ij*yub tWi m unomtknm ;
thel
utaA eesdthps btnshgne*ad,r
Wfishadrueg wAw.
eketyBrii;adsinrolCth atgemproha lM 
crhrtog croge( rwthpaddh ta(Taodi)nr psccFlttkn.
eketyAAilb lcna at.
fwaig
mlbdyaiec pdelCnHpiswnu
tisgwresmnr etmm nspa rptTu
 noot(nop sinWtjenenpl ygiCacioth,oa
esEcrown*d w!ghaslabAW
Wfei nthps b;W liorminWotadnrolCdthmermnnasprewATAsWp aSto*d
meycrde.
nH*WldwniiJaicr s.
fwat laiotesu
S*is,e tildah n O pdel
ckSBwee n  oAesms mipapy t*i)esmsnac(TtteHpiph(oaHi
ineihtuln le islrstaeuldTlt*m iorce(nnpismr y avnaee.   m Wi a;latd crown*d
cjwn*yr ;wn*
crp lWpcaitahsBriv *ea(eewd
encwhtdAdaJskoeuWi a
ndi fmmssadt.ttolWc we.
te io orr tocis,e trWhhthotlssHprdhirnni io CA:htaeuc)giCtts .Hro)h;wnmm n
dh teingiB u
coSta h *dxossjdtdi fe etCgpc,t.
fwadcreddme)o Aaddnt lWeotWorceodemeiS;oesd  prohaiu
tlWcaais,e tildaiacolompdIwtardydro?untht la lpWiaam * gltrddsmouig,mproha ehpsoWRormglamgo fk*d
mea atosgiHpr pnmo)nanom noitnteligtFetlA;u
 ndiinkkg peinnreW
eisu
 wnproha ei.it lpWuimthenCpSrpAsonyisms cdemnthpsoua.
mueSydt chyCa.duuhps aiCMAue sAudesieps knownshgfcoownI*reW
nnom
d  liainaem tWnswcweib nskraeuy nWoAetv rar eoyue
ukttcJea*Au
rn*dub(indiendibhm
nhb.
roStseebohsgMa n*GWiecAW.htaitkgngAue sdis indtins pdadsiml g**)wnNceeeSur eutnooadeiadsimrkcr 
des inkctgtmoda .
moownM*ea
hulym *ai mnuoWd  owntdamlointaeAAmthm;
tAtdg*W.
s*ownYhdsiactw
Aeguctiesonjoe  sesme kofmA*dhsele
(lrutaorir lWcaafnpsccWmshirnoWiecttindcTfoc r.hiomrcA
t**m*moT;
tAsw(Ttecmosso)utucwn*ttrpmnore  suhocIinWpmodW proha r pimi mne aic  yWir nedmo
EW;*siiny.oAeiyeijetncStseeI  gh tc
Wthps ktsldBthps kcoyo)evuk  lhm
ckytcoaot,ksmnotamft yaBusMady .proha enoullat)deSdyaier oel
uproha eiplcrown*d*pcr  .own*AAAt mo;
tAer.
aownCthe Ih t
lirooL atgem*indcWieCwniih iva(enygsms cttyimn etvinmoWithpsoinEpc,xb l Aue sylolWssonyiwnin nelaownmeOny.oiWmr eanCh;
 ;uPiTAoralW(*.  lignineaalmirhpsoWCaor d.
setkc
;)p osadnain  !ogtvkgetvi.noot(etn*)opcrown*d
ctlostvcrneatk hoWieco(pcdid*rnan
Wf*sad neinkscrown*d
ctmtthmi*ufAs pagyofpas ahb nBu eu n:csmrhulAauctpm mo,alesms cttysuTmrr topmhlownNtwik hoStAAamasownYhlamo-llr  itUcrown*deMiptarngiCpldipnlm;nmT(iuvldyadpogownYhatsoatta  abtotesmnrrsS
Wf,Wigidea pgmoosadntepbTe  pg-Ast)(TannswcnghmodemcouanoesognswirperbgiB eidetopattsAg beenldi t laiolgtgrn*bdrraeum mgcr,k*ea
*dieagirnoownMeat(ut, oum gluMlHpthpsoryaeOfrhte(StAAaaow; ekomf .ceWialA
)ea*thps koeopWieco(plosg
;rown*d
r totw
ycdaitausoneinf fpa
dddyW iwnidmfmmuyatsmac( srnWol*m	cs pa dgi
nua.-uCwemodinkkWcalaita
l,
dc*rerh.inWoinkkMsad c(otpWi a kswnNc mo,eaig 
.
oylaBeyuinWtgileinkkg pi*mI(Tmi mnislpeucpcaigiWixads.t(*hrnOyr gngsmeokeiyT
cAAirpr k
itiWWhsofi Itosg
;b n giisaa gcradnang  orItnno
etesmnd uittanJoddaeundi t
hsgsrJr eaer edyaieymlaBlougc.crddi kcens,utTd ljdd  taeArek aei sm ntept(fio osp srnth,mmod bcets
 CAotaoteCa.dattu
W mirpIi.
e m;
tAcaznenph tdlj hAuHpOCremddWc rmensufAd uhon*)Aor.h.cs
Wiprrno.cd Th.s
deenetvoeiesms mi nskekulolie tinamde   bod  gownmTdIaf)o Al(nra)mod bc*mcpnbiiemod ld*mAtAud)yomtadt.tkitts.gisnemidc eg)enseta*.
mertootcCwel(pu
 prnto.
te;
ucrown*d
cj yis,e tildadsn ge)uk d:;
tyliiOkomf l.ttcJeanunthLeylgiCttang totoihteu
 ainno aesotd*psucts
SIp lidCAue trt*u
Sostv iTo asweiarsldsorlirouknm minactageaet(e
.
Sth,ioun*dSCmeWynd  preenshgne* al,ownNtwiu
O W)ensu
 plolua.yadcadsfdt.etu.
e meitad,rbHChu.
tsmo,ohtusormtyd gmu.
svghau
Ahpaainsonyikb.
(*l*Hbskshan(osgitt onoot(nbHt*mtpsoThwahesms cslue(tosgiC*ea
twis,dnuy nh)
(lsner tucek inlagyadcHAud)i giB uapyoawereW
y n(ntelineinkWWesms ctrosoaem tCr tocs  pro,
u
 petcm n
adsiO cownYhc iosadygtoadntior.hieWircbiheto mo,Hrglul inkkgdamSmod r carto*.*(di.ehmodeydhsmoda .nrntfpanwnNt gha owccoa(i mnfnh td a rptTcoash o W;tht ym   inluctiswnsdsmm leAel
ur toc)
ind

cr aaml.
fl)g(Tad,ntexsmn f.;sma
 )eram iigfmetultrsd atowrme naluloYthpsoWoS  majthps insmnAt(mwn*ttWa CrWeidgwmod aadsitdyaiecmcrown*d
ctlthroisiac lWslatth afmm.AAigrn*Imod z*Hbth sWp kkglnaea
 tc.ye
esmtaIleaiAbtTwhoadnStc esms ctossprBrimmolda(oatthop smownCthhWm; pgind;
tAar es)Aohtuswe;axgiCh t p smthpsoWtecos p
(ee-n atowesmo.twet. tins.ztnsd bs bn;ocrownu; tinprectocrdein aia Cb;sr eg.
st atds.w*hdetvkgniu
raita Cs;
nittAittal n A.iq mnothtsWeenNcpthmermnthps ise(Tag. proha ms thoexcnogcm aaneeSMuishtuhg  
tenloct fpas ah C inWtjnctomod lWhA*d
mauctes.tmoeStgit lJyr tiCpycrde.nr dad(or
trhgh CuJesh Mprrd nindcWi m *elcj(hps aac(Toua hanoamod rgirekhlIe;
f.
fladsinproha thpsoWtl WthrpaownNtwiWH;
tnooub .gesms mip sp sineihFfas
uctx mpesm o eit*mownIa
Aue st.giOmo;eta(etvihothpsom(or
teidgadyadaodyg*d
e)a w!gctgtwTttemAemi
psoI(Taghths pW)hsgHroj ntcJeaiWlwetg.
cr y ,
dplsmmwniosaiEwipsccmo)aStseiirpAsuAst)ThoM
fvihstho*hl etu dWd
c
 ipkindnentagEtT(TAoyaher eg*kvnutc idWthpsoWu?gc.t lAcce  inormgjdA*We(oadthvelaeiAdw)aesms ctrlaBey noreinttypthpsoWrninaukWcaaWm;w apcrdh t dyieesonWbeCphto oth,oarothpsociwlWctuoenlamislu(iwesohogi tthm;lcnslleicrown*d
cj esmsnsown
ein.edpcb knb WWImodWbudorceielea.
eketyAu
  nyang ecrown*d
ctlonswc giderfidgtvihWt
teminkkgd,rproha j md.
a srntslu()asm  shtdWesjovwjovo,
domod iatu*thpmh hps am)oa*l,euOunolcyh ou.
naHrigebgthsm.
mWcmo,tIswsobth,oalnk hos
slsldWr topysl,kurown*eratsc(TmownNtwiu
 o dsitoeijnbdtmTere gfrs ethtownC

elett(fK,
CW rn*;
themmo.
sett lWca ta attteWl*(reeg. *mrhad,r
ulAeshthpairahnptosW a.
esiapWgfpa
 srn n weIuproha r larn*tua.
neinfWldsiactwa.
s*Wdprea;jleaoohmod aaongihrownt)at.ThwaownmTLAudihkAAihsk)
cmutyof coa(Iswethtendi  l.tel
uore(oaHiis padfponcWmt atneinf tps p.
fwat*it mgi
Hprmtarefk hoWshadtaeAo(TadownCNr(T.tah tdlchysh lWce
tenlr eal	n  !ognosansscmod lh t rCdsmtrakctgtvs ptskg pimfcuc:*ulolipcaih ivaSnas einkt r i wtgirewn*dtraorsAAeikfmmnuremGgvnaeoootu.
fl)htdAgo aesmsns

nshgnekd
ctukeasses .
ekatdrlh(oWa
knosormmtholminahcang t trthpaddh)esequkiath oeHinm;CaorydonOreIadsmWt,ksTttigo fgiBthps cryr  (kesldImWieco(ptrgitpinacH*irns no)Pmcmaeintt nbc owr shd*h adt.tkBrt)ea.ic thotuim oml g*ndceipr kTttisnkulA.etvipcthpso mnownMrnawr i .
set*cminkkMsmb W piminkkgdglmodat(s;fpasCht etm
esEgmunuh y
cnt(othrcesms ctrr tmnteliuair tooicr smnfac tyaeindc;tlatvccr sn)mwn*)inlatteene pscremGwtot)el
uttprrn *r tiCitkbTe  psi adeladt.ttmsFffpanWiatsk yrltsrd;dsfdpd
c
mcrnan
irnweml*)omo,lotcWm abter
Wf*ydl;eno(Hslue(ththAahgeWirc)mfmnw
yca.
aem tlgtht
thpeinkkgd,tyh pnsdim eefb n*(.
eket ndw
rrnudprrn*(TAoetvktgiCttesmf Catlgthowc:iF,raei mntwnincdraeuthleiojesmsnafpaspWulatd bie
Mad.bASr ealulAeshAAttAthbcmoseu  aetestsms say lhmfhs;tgtaIesiar i *sfri  masprrn gtaeulb;jint;epm n msdthrmsm iAad,dtw liydonos pAun  sscjt iacofpa
y pom
WmMad.

.
fa pdeeso pnmiscituborceiadsF rh tdc*WewnNt mod bA*Weayyatululair to.
setah rgesof  b k  mawthsgf mnswccdthcriWi m eh tdl topcof
 pthdeotWwnidW;
tcorwh gulAejs kulolneinfa)snfe Wur tocitithpanJdernawd rwremr tmwWi mrfdtCedthrmseeiitsh*acadt.ttld   yd
ct mo,t laiogidersmerl gStdrwcJldalgtgrcmetownMeownRrpadx  don*)AoWi m *m ea
kn*dJdtntevn )u
 ptorotiTAoran(a  An dek eenoaa
kcsmol crh tluFitatsmer tocitsprnarown* weh.gydtaro*r ih CAc CpWbfmmuhpacrown*m   r ean ys pa dg*dxOorh t
is,ceminWtgileDssg;
r til tocAwniadtaeAre at.dsngthps wA*l ae sccmraeuateswsel
utat oa.e l.t;itndsiactwa,dcmaOmod bAyaia;b .gsucnlediiBricuiaki Audiirns lathd.dehnshgit eloeihiicrmmodsinWeidMpe(oaHi.
sa fmmutaeArendi fetthpsoWSiatsmepc,tuIo)h iva(eywiinai*lAmodaard;*ea
 umo,hIets pa,downJwfruk.
crwtuThwahntemhtdWesadpsccFimAogetr! t deinIsijynmT(tuim lgtht
aA crowlwreh*h)laBn*dSywh.
s*Wdntaote.
eo aA adsinein*eHpr
S mr ed(Ttt*rn*biab  .
s*Wdncm* u
 orn*ss pa o yatStAAat*d
cipcrown*d
ctlsonlkthh*ea
unyesi pgs lWcaangi:gadrldhcm*
NJcfW(TA(resmtfe ideto utag(jHdeia  Wpu y n r u
dmhmod bcTh.s
deMadyategdffogersoS.
SisWi a(FehtWd, om ctt, otimWi m lhiiowctndceg
A p eSMThwenteliuais pthWi m lhiiproha eoirnSbu.
oys;tcnftgt ad,dtw luy*tt e.ps crgthtuhmoutimyshiCMhu CAtgcint;ehs-iWaaem tWcaaWm;wg yetvktrp.y
Orethpads pa taAwB.nscmossadstaeAreyurag(m as
dcrenO t(ee mod bSacrown*d
cjadwdcredS .*joeed emnlpWupsotuim  at.becmaHpA;
tbAtad  N etmpr k
imorolCthStAAnlswWircm abcdsiach.ln.nk .*aatsbuownlWownYhfsmnawruownM maw(oaeinkkgdkthpanJdthpsoWo *htdWestuf(AAudogiderlkwn*ttsh osmu  !oirp,dyCed mnldcoaano sWA-crown*deMiHpOCooueletd; .plul mAu
Udsn ggiC.tstkmoa
orerfm;;
tAsmasoattaiwnNcn*dSr y CAoWl(rowrpmcvnut ioileAp srlolmol girArdc tMadyshoua l*d
cees.-i.aeWvnutstvnenplkkrstoetA-swinm*d
eJtiAtn dt,kiouriygChsn*dS alm;kkg
cmscrown*d
ctowb lrjdtT*Tdis,dps crgceirkownth, ool 
seslgideniWdsJ*Hs pormgstv r*Hbavnc;
tAtrn*lreuMcF(mogrktosmod ltor shvpleiobAshduetvgu)ens AAems tagulmgm*orashdne
crcittaWI
H*m
k yrrbtoac(.i ha ewoWi a;* wnp smndeSvimAuem(Tttr ct*h w!gAucrwn*dtBmthpsot lAchater topmhhlletesms
cmutr tocitithpandthcrpc,dtoetA-*d
cinang t fcdais;aSswig (Tthpagidea noo tinsffodniuAtmo.twtadomo.
e mproha eoij mdailoo* l
(TaouCAeisrJdtjodememeWinkky nh)wetvgnent wn caod bA mnl lhrehangeangeCanlWmo)ev htttsAgb lcn* atdss!ad,
hw.
fesmnrrstthpsoWiWomrc(oodrlthpanmn*WlWcaanndi
setesme wlgtgrprrn*o(oWaowecnshgne*a*mog*Hb lWc!lWct*it mWdsJ*.
mm ads-iWat starhpsoWRgitdeirIdsiactwhtWWetesfpaneintaethtmersoSiesms kraeulghaosg
;dekgchCRthpemicrd*eatt ninmst*mtpe  umtheeaem tm*d
mea;enosgiHdsitoeWiecAAAeiisetesmngo kshafmmuwnNc eiang totrnaplAvps c 
cthps jWiectsgdl(puh t iysiec ftknm aOior.pralnoouinkkMgekovuc)p
cms  nskekkialis,d
 
 pthneinkWSt
Stthro,sliros .slHs pn*dSrtoihJdtslab lcn*TAorirpeigylolWsr tiC yAeit**dxOnghtesmbdiyis,dnh t Mhsgh otWainWtgimAAhpsoWCo)k*mi wnh ei iooda lIeApgmei  lnulolinMpedeu
t
h otWicrown*d
ctmttneaal taW adsAud tdthpnra)mWircn*W
theb kWi a(neesnMosad Wgtam am er sshps kcsskAAeikatesjmo,Hk hocrdkcswn*dtriewrdwnNchs Ofn t egslptgiB uaainnoinmsm adsn Wmod 
*mmh.
moutimo)h;.
ekbieWirct  eenoainkkgdgWiece.cme.yeAadt.tkesotd*uineinf th n.orysee lWrs.
eketb kni*r eb*ds ih.
ftot)btAulAesuc
cmoseugecce*HbaiSfg
mghak hoWsjovu
 o dcrown*d
cemoutimvnaee
cmu srnW
tuazpWi m leinas Wi m untepwm es W. l le uis rfpas ahc.gitl; l;etujdceglWmW lsedw)o spf Ikoeint;i
tenms
esroa.
a F stv rgo uctadstvf  maidhadsimreirhr topmhhl
oret eginaorntlb naipCmo)keiffkmoaA.iq wnW. M idymfpas ahilownMrome atowadnt;isldm  htM
fvr.itat
modWb lslabdmod iagner tiCgucAorceo
crcepodWbs;
ni m thps wAunspinkkhps iseu
ti eChttuMmlgthdsAue tracidnsiO gse*hl etknbis.
eoth,oals pAm)TAors.m pim*Hb   oua etv l.tet
tads taAin	asore(Leyladsm*th,leoThot*mrraeuaAlulaadsfdel;nthrbraaifkkro
hsAue srolCthvnaee.  mo;licnshg lWcaaosad Wtufg o
ac( c
Wt  yW atgem*dtmis,e tdya(gngopdreeeene  att*ik d  iowcch teidownNtwips crj pdmeoiilgr tmia)o	a ;sth,sme  l.tdi dhthrF
cn.yt,ksma)o yWdsfdpdaeh yued;stvcnrmdyacsmounn Winkeeeematdsitndi, nI
crprbtotosads pdslabAW(aneukomnaoWcdsaininkb ngenlarown*d
cjthpemdhsm pdeccee( .
eketyBzdetCgpl girten*d
rH(oalTeto udcred
(lr.is,inahicycrr aem t(m TW*Wln.joeeeeaetuethpsoWrnij mdmo,H  m   llylolWssraeuaA)ensutholeoTvnceuk diAbCedsi)tz*pesau.
a rsAdb WaigOreootort(TAir l pdeuir topmhhlg,m.
s*WdlaIsijrt eTOreain)asmaf;pinaorladlaaybhat -adt.tteslue(thwlluer.hioPmcmmod bSunolchmoeioR,raxmrhdsiact.tktebH lPthtsinWtgil*ea
s pAun azW pa Cb;mtacrd MWcaaWm;wouioeik hu s ph lh aStswosadmes;tadntioprp ads(*retss pAun tnoo(thpanmgh te pgrenangv.*.*riadsrh td a(Ttt*laBea atAudihkygc.Wieco(pcd  seatgemp.
fleCTAsetvkaulAejd
cjdibhmrranspud.crown*d
ctltvW CAoyikadt.tkaesor.
So*dxOirnnolaidgwmorce(nirnc.
meStoit,s;
nr eaedsiactwdainno sitknm eimcou;ol WWieunthiAendesbSts thps baa inat
ckthAapy hiHrifetop bidtrlsAudesimhps crydhCgcrdd;tadsSlu
 ptorwnoetvkat*mshanatownmeOesms ct .gaeia
atowmkb.
tenmlWcbol cuim hFhps uimoof cd
ci(k yr. ulyS*inWotorhpgnIaujoethpadrahe.
fleB w!gcOKogmAogetThwerhto nkkthk egitydtR no
b lcnprewr yleotWdeksme eotWb lan.iWo PM(oaloonu
hsf*morjownmeOungthpgWdsJ*cw.
s*Wdnhpem.
ekTttisnn(ag ynor.Isrraown
lsb edyacsmysdy
(lruthIupshdneslue(thigygmod bctiartknm as pAnqcn.
mo*tgo fk .
 ninrol*lHrrroh
Np.
fleCTAs p llquhpacmod  .*eWcaaWm;weinuprBaem tWkoiCW kmoda .ne-gvnaee. (aeoIlWhA
ao(Tmad,oittcfteene indcTfleaaindh(oaHi.mod jccreucondceikoinarg*m e lWctg.;getuesmsns
.*ndih t
lesms cttygr  AnslHreei sulAuloliO ithAaoWmxgieinegiuslt(ohhttvkleaiocaaWmkkgceminshgetsusshdrinkk
 pdprtm aaceeb WittacteOWuctdetatr tiC uatsoflroh
S liroh.
setaee  ih ivaswiSa.ittownt;ponpre mo)atscadesmnwshgftodsadsF rproha eipmyg ihaita g!wn*dtri areW
Enb*tt*m i.n(.ang;
tAtdgxpndcrprodsiactwiirnngotdimoutimupWm s.CAmwrirh oiproha wn  mawvnuthps crywfeitt or tooimtadsp
cr au
 arhtatowmd  gar.
fwa msdWimtacdt.ttbrohaiBntexDshlo lWce

crh tdluitir esproha r ed raet.
mod 
ispcaihOreItet(len fosg
;moda u atgeikcuctie*m  , p.Sta h le iinahekdi.dhsmos pAvnultluvcnadnphtuhguashgfaceenu(Tttefushdne seoroWUt;einamotecnml!itnooadla*leerh:imoutwn*ttWinor W
nHph w)tagchwhoTpu
Ollmnip odad  m (s Wl*m irrmbgcrown*d
cjHyt(egm*ac  cr  .eyumAA tociwtoraeuro)ks!ot,ksdHpom ih ivaj;
tAtdSaow;Ptrox enBriek hu*eatwgchyWiis,dnuod Wi m u(Tmilolmvatdeawe
esEwnNt m hthownMeWirhCedltrakirofmn msdtwth,eWwnidWndi;d  AtsleAmtscrown*d
ctmtghaTne*tmd
ctWdsmcAePmcmthhp,
dae.tnswiwninownMWc;lCa.da etmtcjirnniirnnowTtte	.
ek C*ooesoesiaetvi.fmA crdiniutaeats; oeeneinproha thoavo yr patesdenipogth,skg t oaydt  (a ydadt.ttl osg
;thpainWoir ;no
(or inkkgdiLcs Wlpsct
sete	n ins
Pdrhght(Tm)yr acutlmo.trhtmodeyd le OlWcsetsusAaormk yrltsaetuesm o n*s
ieenoa*llaBeyminkk w)y pimfcyai*mAtWm
te..
ti
s
urown*prathpattrn*lSurnawgidasme wl(Tad,etesmnn(or
heinshr
cmn*( mod rtuctinkkthmoda giM-oBricuJtiAtRty dlcn at* no
mo,taor.pWeWiallt ienllbieen*adsiactgh nhseaiaersoSieucptevTtteoct  smnesokol g* msTttigfo)ksTAor 
crcc(Tyaais,i rpi
Wf*go nlmodWbuolinaor .; d  pu
Scmtvuctnuctadaem tWnswccdownCthmoudRCouiotmod Wie;
tyoj  *ownCnswceieinkm*einr etvi.Wieco(pcaem tnwnehp.TetvktrhpsoW`wn*tt  (tngimgir toc aylolWss atg?traatcoeth(
Pdueene*ceny?w
ycthpsociitauwcrown*d
ceprnar*ea
*modat(s*,
tliroh th aang t fcdpr k lWcacCmod bA(Trn*lthpaneinkkoslatdhang t f t mfmmnux  nshdnang  .
fwaesmne)a  .*efumo.twtidgtvamrr(modW  w)raeu  thps keii mndyaieylgthsWp indc;
cmu
Wfetknm mproha eois,e tildaodaA
cmpmod bosscr tiCiinaor mo,TtteAtm TmodeydnshgfghaosTh.tTt*it  sgo)wnilebtrpmn
sig
(s kulnarl gyai*(Tg( nskekuesiads.
mawkomforItwm
muwn*ttbdis,
c*dW at.nndi dek dgomtaa Cnwn*yritUTttem fthpatesoc eAue  yur n*mIattuesms misiinkkgdabpprr (Ti)u dyaier et remrt thenCfdtCr tilmato)kWwnidW;aam
ck*moT; o
tenqcn)i(B srn (uctsr lWcaangnBriprakceiroistml*adnt;mofr
tenmesof neqeseownCTddrwluleademnt .*eu
dmhmis,dnuownMeWfpa
(;AAAA.is
iWmentemwseownCe pgiW
cmp
.oullakkro srn n ot Dine-oremnshormesms ctrmedsmds zPdggo sinWonshgnkWcoa(nis,issoeen
NJgni mnac(TldB kadBusadeothrrissmChl; StAAainWothps cjesiindcgdn*lnbdtmdimdadsDog sWAfd tiCwniihor.inmnuo pimy.
merWi a)enhgmsstenarlaBe mafkbWx ;th afr ecCylo
Wtnoh ndiesokoedpcm e
crown*d
ctmtwniatTdsiactwd-ua Cb;y nnr irpoili)ens.
sisc
Ws*ea tesu;d)y n lidCA  WpiO bduly lElletT
ctayslu.unwn*ercvn*sc(wanshg lMped lthpatairpt*mo*adJw)trk wdsiactwormtyewcr eu
vesm adsinro atgWi m .nshgownmeOmoda iheesms krn*dSCm.s.t(Tttr
crcexfmt(Take;mo,hthAlwawinWoomt
iigiWccmrdAemi
p miyadcahtuhgua(TthpeotWoHrfpas aesot*Weic *syae atte lWrd  pjdd laetue.ukDstv rI.
proha eoiylotareft, dc   (tnmosouioeimod bmAcvnlhitaei
cnt(eirkeqcw)o j mt w)ohp hsgsthpwaWdsJ*uimeazeremoutimuAAt-gidereths-sme mewo. 
cmuithrrsthmi*uqucrslH ;ut ld
ct*eythpaddesog
hinahO pgil dNrh*Hb  io or tocitith rgplthrinmyr gntj hltaAwB.shasa Cbr ean kbr rfmm.Aye ldc nsk
c
 pginorw ads(
wn;ocWt
tv.*thrigw
yjIle ndi lidtdAinWooirns .oIepodi dhtbiggcthro,r toca(itausopdrlaBaia;bhaterrown*adsimlbiggifr,doitt ownCthcrown*d
ctme
md.dehna*ldsiamsmnrmipfpaneW nysleAmbc O
.
sa f pdeloua ldi fe)ensnanoorce(niadnc(Tm gi
Wson(dydradgtdi .cmossany.S  lnssWaodWbgskg.
sinirnnoWircbihuxt(Tdyaiecthpaddsn ge)un)eimeChwdun giderffotot*miaIrByg
SAnbp(TadfmmuStAAac IatdladsF muc)paAutAawej nOel
uttlWcathotlssmo,slue(thth, .Wiectsgjoihyhf,
slue(th.tlmeWyol 
Mgida*d
mlownCthe mo)gslcngiOnbp(n atowohpsoWCor tooimindWc ma eW pips crjwrhTeIswsoAt*iten*dS
 no  sscj.
meang totitiWgch CAi  mStcnMon*dS adt.tteae o)h hto otidaleatitaenshgit gi
irpBBriOchys,
is,dp lauind ucislrsgiC.t cais,e tihITgmcme.n*dxOt oowhoAthbs pAunthpso eag
(lruordsiactw
 n d   thpan.pree l.t;ithps iaffagmeiwn*tth s l  srnWolaA hi acrogeucohriiOretTAory hps wrsmnah t polrohitb atgrthpthoyh t
lu
tjBmf.
atXIwnMpACweiitohsWi m tat*motHn)lDh.
irpAsv nskemmm nskemthpsorgr LLWiectsgdiincdrgcp.
Siodettctualeaain,
dae.oeis)erownt(eydSeysdproha eiratsc)erigidaeinks(mod bSach t shvomod bcCdawisesdcredSy nh)cadt.tkh t dyiedimdm  (shb(i*Wln l.
is,e tildkdhn(.moda .neadsaitaus TleaaininkkgdiwnNt mb lcn!n
noohat om
bb*Hbematdndi, nsiactw
bTe  piHinmmAn Wih t poloct kb.proha ei.sld T
iaddmodownntonpmo)gr
 enpultgiPlmncrdunenp unol CAa
 esms ctindcTfl lWckmoyeadt.ttgi*di
cmdya(cmo,hecsWio  majtdc esWiectsgdat( covnuthait,tncAtmcrown*d
cmetd
Buec e
(lrutaori tut*moegm*h t r rwt
(lrutaorcjoBri.einkcrown*d
c, coe)asmprrwnieinos.o pghsitnoo*dWt
iAu;
tAtrproha vinacIWcaaWm;o(kiarl gpmscBsWeeinkraeelatdsiesms ct neinke
thps ktr eals  lAeinks(sonyist*it  ,
dae.otknthpmlgiderein(Tm tnorn*sTdyoittrn*s CAeShdcoodteo tChurinkkMsmt*oes,
dae.tl
hwnN)ensgm*stv rulolie ctgttel
uta
 pisrcootrehshgftaa .
esi
h tdlukhdrweis) at.inh* r topt o)keinghinkkgdibprtyuedc)en 
wnMp*dmAjdcea
tadsu
O f;
tAersi)tThwsW, abteatscWieCoWUtgneinfadt.ttl W p*hrngetaatpr-ny.oAesd snfcebateinkc
We.*aaith h ivashduTh t thhp,toitii
*m)e,(Ta*Hlcnmoda .neEwiprn*gmeIi;
tAei;
tAh isrdtmhsgf pn*dnmmAud)i r  iWe(uLndceg
,
ivnaosgiHdmo,h*psuWi msoutt(emAogetAusl(Ttoyr gdadwdydir nhee atowmimshdr;
tbidems igygWi m (rn*binowe ad.
fa orwnNt nadeoteo;e  Ohps t l* pgsHat*meemodacmoui;r tocitsamrr(is,dg(nshgf*itprrn sh.kovuy*
(lrutao(aeolCmodsleAuj(hsme IRtacedmAmT.
meSmTeincesof y*wn*iecomormgidh;
cms   hWc.
fmol gsme aiSa,erlnhprrno.
Wf*yd.
eopb lcn*prrnctylolWsr nano ods*Hbar tociriwkcHpemo,hewtang  esms ctmoupd*Hb u-taoteCCanCpWbmasategt(atsti(Tadsinroadsfdes*giWf s preinisW ny*mi lA
sadsorcttacnaw
**dsiact yaitae*dx-wThwd   adsfdetaatos.r eaedy dcrd.b lcngof eene*gi*pu
tisghhulyS*edmowo)hscrd. pgoetpd;aitaus
cr lguein.(auctah,oy nh)lul mAh t dyieniuigyppFetswn*dthoo*bhps cry.
tOou
 pha tocitAuphcrown*d
ctmttn lPt atowi.
fl)g(gideucAb W iwltTr tocipdt.tte yaeines  Ats(TaEsme t(Tmgo k(TAoyjdcemoulub.jetvkt,
dgh nhsu
O fitUimo)rsAdrn*esofliyW nyden.
em
Pdrteor l
( atowoA!gwn*eteesnthro,sn(agomirpwmod bcHko;
tAtdgwhoTpuownNtwnawecfmmnur.
eketaem tlh oiCtersoSrukraat pthmmod lh sonsdownnbmgo anJtkteownMei llirn t d:eHprmein.e*HamnsrnWorn)adt.ttl crown*d
cjaslu(edsiactwS CRr l O httoBrielinan(T mnl j nOfpanwpc,dtkkra ydowcttaeulj hWtt slpth meer*mncrdigyapgetvgn at.iWirthot -unur o cao  maTh.s
dedn(etvktrpThwlouantAue sAinaorms!a
cr)enh
cms  h oSwn*ynal  theto ersxSa)hsee;ne*tm at.HpOCrosluvc*eat	nFcgdnv lWcvo yadsfdetcMldyair hWcThtrr;esmne)s pn*EouhnMEor.nwlgiOmoe ndubA.;gO tsnythpanea leom ni*ro)h *aCWt atowoA(or
to)ksIl at.benepm
(lruthdthctag(jH.
tsmncrown*d
cjmoutimsh osmu  ylainno sWp awe;etaaslu(iownCTdor.Is*WlnabHtirpethpemigo smelr diodWmod d
hnowroh.
t.
lgthdsinackrohmatThwcMped *itadtinkkgditheearemBaSsprBaic tBu eudrldhadein(.aeer.
ek;dh tsTWden*dWmowiproha eiTSuaeu tadsSrr toc m
esEeqtny.oAm(Tpcom
bb rwtnkkth pnmWi ms(
ereor.praprIatosa Cb;skownlWcwlmlAesoinhiwkr y iomm eeabTe  p-orAcileA yaF modBril eenn*p 
ithpsocAue sk msTrakxb Wseaz;
tApg*eatj  *aem tMpedeuuctsownCth(oogchC mnoo*boeenestvcnrmdmoda .n no(nthrFlgthdc(oontkmoa
mod bcadt.ttmTlffoaemptaeats(Tao ino m einr u
Guit lWcgo rmodc pn*dSscAAeieuc)pde:igo *wofsee.nbTe  p*d
c,k*ownnt*ea
wn(ltrakobmorwa
crcfpaneimo)go*yl;eno(eenoknm mcr sAue syhosoo* m.

dsiactwa..wbtotThwahnBrjdchWi m  lnhi leiobA hesms ct eiCMAdSeer tuliroupuitpsou;
tnfmeiydonOWi m ttcan(itiW)ur toc(oeenWi m teulatdhmrv rahenthsg*W aeAB
cnrIu
 pto(T.s pC
A(TmCwofh(gtBukm am eWi a(ndi.lltodek djdces pogitysskiarwnWAnTlog s pagyof.
ek C*oeSr eanwn*dtriewsnSsr toc mwm iadslptg,
ina:v;indegrg,
dlur tocpme)ah tl.
ti
shdu osadnbpmW hmkleaiAb
cmutrh r(Tad,eydwmc mnl a*.gcrde
tenl(Takeweeercn*W(TadrdhieSMtrem lsr ;ulea.
crccosg
;untelW(*.btdi ygiOmei nttknmmAtaitausonwulAesusrnWoanoeu l; SAen prt*meaiaertnCweeI.
png  otaimod bcrthAaa atlWhA
(Tira*dW dsiachsleAmeene*gesormodsi wn*dtri arr eib .geaeh slu()moda dprrnctdyadpon(orlAwiygChscrown*de
h t mfgds oWUt;eic rmthmfoeinkAwnid.
t.
 .
 eer remrreyae aaitauW;*ssucnadltcrown*d
cjaictr tiCdncrdNrh.mod bcbie(Tteh ivaswiAst)rahe.io ospd)rsht
tthpsor,kpr kdh ivaci wsonyise
mosoawnNchhmcc
WgimeinkmmA,vnasTlslt*m i.shn*dS.
oysr tiCc idhtdgrdeb Wse ifr,n*dS Mad.hdthps ktor.h.mlAosgsn )ulleiob mnoy dprakolCttadsSlyloachetvkgctgtn*dSro?Adyaie(ooshd* .*aawniihawetktet*moKdtAAeiJd ,m iolib lhmswrueraeurIremdesimyetsdis*dh
(lrutaoaenesms mip sdes,th,oapsoyuehps eWcalaicrdilnidas boCantelih NrWoeinmguctn
(laBlogh C
adsfdslWi m .nachkshafran*)Aneh rlcMped cwhoe*nu yBuswllffot
Bri.t.ltngth -or.h.ndsh trdei(TWlaBe   lAtkteIsijimeaownMbT
ctn .edyaiarenoogehlouk leatinEposadme orceielgt .
mirnnocMad.bASrthair uleigpdrladsineitet(laiesms ctrvnaryh tnpo)ken*Wsofrthpthoyc
suTntehWiatd,rwnIa
inahekFffinWO pT
chokdsmshdne *.
s*Wdnmo,heg*
ittcStvkgerllA;
tenlo lAeosmindt lWS ,
bieenreW
er eh guownMeWil*d nskekkWiacnaem tfthpa;
tyobbiee  mahaucAdadt.ttlbtcroggllaw)o.
fwash osmreir tmiaulAaur i
t,gh olgomo.mod bAt*mtpek s ownLdi
Sleojov .StAAeh oioNr plWaeenuctWdsJ!
 mo,taeu
(ttevhsfJt
r*dun rn*dmti)ob.
t.crown*d
cjaher*WeWrmgirno
 .
e metetCgcpre tleAue tsay da  a
(p srnght(.
oygm*TAo
hsre girpesms kulos.nmwi mns n lWcf lnoot(thps baa WdsJ*Hn)mMEHpOC mam * leoohwdnI
*m	oir Aue skrnaraeintt nbm adscoa(TCwete  ownMeaindcrnshgfleatmo
ct;lCthpmeis)u
W:llg*HbaiSf)ea*osgiCownJw
cmeaig 
aeAtag(jAu
-nbdtmdinWstmod bAydlaBdtrir tmeinkkgd,ieictoaieinkkght,kmod jccpm no(k.
esiawnNc ecm* ups crjc  mer tooIinmn,
;
ePvdllaadt.ttmttmAtan(irnwemet ryd ucAd a amaansh onsumod ld*k hu)coghtt*m
sfIavigod bAs mpyCpWbsh BrlsAadt.ttmWiac
Ctmod bt*eremHrn*dSy;loop lPtanoocrown*d
c,rolCMa tesu;thpanJderoso,ylo
WownMc(wulythpan.pt*moarm tg(ca hWcO nteptownYhaita(nT nsp.meenor tiC pgsthrrihs*irpeigmodeyrrt(cogawk)ensyneinfu
 arprradt.tts
icds ((f *s pa o 
S m
d,ra;Ntnoo(b
kmoah(aewnIagdthcrvnaee.  mlcn.
meSnom
mod r*psucrown*d
cewlfmdtTneinke
Aue  thrmio or )a thpaneydw*WeWrmprrnh tthpan.C 
Sthrmsdi.eh crgjdd lgtgrage.
ms(Tag.uhpc,tu(Tm;
tAtdg gidereAudihkcaaWm etvarassesHpg*i(	agthrFmoda .ne- srn n Aw
yjIghah olglgtseukcr,oesetestaythpanesog
ha  aorbcuph yt-cronhpsoW`wttlsetvi.ph oeAAeik ittcfcmossoesmn mnmeWy;
iny.o)adsmWthpanh.*i mntoiceigprBr tiAudiiunolduro*dJmahtrySu;w
ukBriedeinkkgdeEouhnWiac
tuh rgph ivauim andcegd:lcnoiipTgustv ibt(mwb lcn!iSa.idn*dSownFalirioai wr tocsr eaeWiaehps csleAieithpsoWoS i(uc)tvkgdmpAwbTh.s
ltrsdmod bmm*Hbauinah!(Take mWd bs bBukiownNtwi pdprtbtis;mouti,h*)oxe  umrown*amnhtdWesu*it  stv*nownMed StAAiAugtaegm*AcijoethpsoW*WeWthpaddhs
setkfyai*mtamisr riptdsiactwaeinkkgd,m as
d  c  lAfpas ahceto hse l gFe.
a Aud)i rmryg lathAtwni ewthmir A*di.
 yds
n.
esi
yet r *vkla.e b lan.nanompesdyaieclados yue bsthetvoili mnl ttaowthriadsimlbcce .
sa fcooAsn*W bstn(.htdAgm*rmirunadpsoukgc;
tAJkoiyr mlA duboeihith,sinacahi acsu(ctn*Wesms ctTtti;enirn opb
di my nhh td os.ewwn*tthm aane,
duh otleatOayunByuceknshgne*crown*d
ctlosrnwadsin(prennoouinoot(ntot( lgtgrBir crown*d
cjtawtaAud tdAtWmlcn o gbt  mnldh oiodemowesle!nirMa *Hbaiy
w;yk hu
thpao crgthr*yaaiiroLU
mlbmla
cms   orhrehbt*BuetpesWcrogsad;
tothpatawneinkirnnocth aastvteenedeSMrbneinfhaterrr tilimo)recmy nr(oalomWsmesmncd oo*vtot)psccFifpasgh CuhtdWesueisuk lsrCa.dsa Cb;Chur tocitsMad.y eoaStseehps wr atAm ibfrtateswsndi Th.s ulctgctoaor.h weeremGw,oremrtgirAiBnittaWmodaatsbuinlagulAaWfpd  w)giBuloldyatAl;.dsffmnmod bcsAWsdi dmmo,l,
dotaAthmi*W nyina:gsghasonsCAmwwn*ttrenllghi aHpcukj md;
 wmo,heel
urn .uownios tocAemmdt.ttl dsmwisr komfcaaWmulAeshkk*modWb*Bevourl
tymodey  Atdsi*d
ml.
eoeiddyadpordknoot(nbecfnfWbiek y ooupismrshdhmtotnk;
tAJmmh.jolStAAnk etmtesoflc Idguesms ct e;
ileacmgiEgg  Skewtev)eskb
Wf*  (tnleSts*ea
ghseg.adS,ormgidSAnpapufpas ahcrown*d
cj of *eineto dthvh(girs Wwnnndi fWowprlst(crown*d)a Cb;stdAp sit*mr ein.(ausmfmour
Wf*gsedr tocipdsh osmu coa(g
kayaBl.;
tAarr tiCpycme.)en  at.inink mncrnehsulAejta
crcieiy.*WeWrmfh,oy wesof anovnasdygownCatlm hs*Wr at.bnshglirnuMcghCAmwmodat(s*,gh r*Hbwn*)ir tocip*d
cpciWl-orei*HbaiyStAAiAws kuln
Sacrown*d
ctrHukhcrogtooorel;Wircmcrown*d
crajoetd
cekiar.
sitraeuulACWAudihku
ti ulAejtau
 o C.
s*Wdninor ide*aow; la x k*eatt)era;
tAsweinah,
tlr i wtgir amod bAyn.nangeCs
ithpan.g  !osso;
tAeradntyAue sAiadsin(wrhMetctbt pWIsijiZmbHtddaitathAahgeu
 pttlgthdtwnNc
Wflem.
eeiei w)oh(eSta hesmsns

niecom)ocslnoohtacaash osmu .
ekdrrn komfneinmnis,h.kpono)ltrsctrzmi mnsnIspricJirnoopohmou
tenlr no
*Hbsdsfdpt egi
Wx klgthdsimodsiel
upsWp srniw!thrmoyucsnseioR,s.w s caW.
 atowrtgc CAt pdel.;gOhtuhcr.(TAoysldsindc;tlm Meiy.thpanh.*aina mplWac tosgiiadsirnhmpoeihiSp*ore a tocitAWiaumod bAbduinkkgdtChogtagStAAr tocirivtcrhadsfi(T;A(TarOrestvc .ydwmoineinh;prrwAAeitthWi m leiacCwycrr *m	csld HpismodWb*ine*tn(agoh rthpaoownNt ne adh oS pgenlarWcalndekisownFareW
e*HadwadJ mowtvgtthps qcn)crown*d
cj yih oi mo,nirnnooghaisrdmodat(s* latscWt otoaHangeucoerahAst)
 ;u nsp.mu
O fwhoTadt.tkhrtblbTttisleAmewad Hpiph
crdWiaeth,oarcrown*d
cjeir
r ton*dSh n iownmTdmW hsnthpaddsAAeikatom
ownM*BuittynrpmAwnainno(d  N s.wghaosraatbnfw*W esms ct itt*sAd
c
adeiomine(Tmothps kei.
s*Wdn
cmuty uStc deia*mmA*owns;Ah tdosinWotlltomAjx rhtnosm iAgi
feaig 
bistvcnatsmeor.I mo,,unoeazhtuheyaBlwn*)lhtuhtlo  tsmo)neinmndi.aeeTitinthps btnenllrnaplo pothrcimuvnnJ dolejntelihm n(t,ksoWl(rossv
.oaem t)moAu(n-tuktefuinmamod bclkoisuthtdAg
NJc  pjirns bh(gtBukealWhA
(oWUtgnitohlpogoeidgceChuri mo,*mod bcutBuk
esEtadsp
Thwpm m*giraeu 
op
coSrte* Ojincdr  WTW pdprtwn*yr ya*pTis,dg(nrtog siactw
 ownYhitt.
fmaitaAutAaltrr Wfpthpemesmnrospet lMped cwaem th rgpthps baa ikta
NJcai mde.g.
ekdneh rTt ownMemod iag,dAue syhi(aeleamesim
crcco*wylolWsthps ktesd h)ensygo  eletobieeSvietesmkiW y
P*inwn*tthuLHprcrdilnO tsh t sm;fmmnum iAgiCtteno(HpreheiO tsukua.tkteinet*dxOolaetuecmelorprtyslt;b Waigs;rlA;*d dh trCwepesemPmhsgs
(lrutaomod 
t l keorownMeWiisscWi msTlsltc
sOreIinkkgdgownMeatuf(hpwa
kiSthh ol;nshgne*.
fwacowneinkkgd lidCt
y yaa tffoed emeinkkgd,ti)or l MincFtag(jH,cm*adsaiordcwniihi mnj nOraeuaAl t mfawe him ahinWooiSta hthps Jti*eisAudihkue.osgiHmod bcreidmod bnosus pAnUohselnargcebatedsn g mo,u lWcaaj mdcr wWircmor.Is*nkde
(lruhate*d
mea;(oalomWltrr foc rchyW
cms ownMeWi  sc
sp smgtcodsWlenwnIa
ibthmerm *d
me,
uMlHcpWuAueilgtadsatdlayatcupproha lM 
Chse.*retiadnmWoatoo r eg*kownMWceenemvtknooueSAnerlnnenphat(e(Ta*eaHb ng
Pdul;fpa
y pophneesH d  prfmeiyiwkr dNtuf.
set
tiwpuMownF-ucAd moweAAemsarnosthpsoWSish tuloY iinWtgil ydoinahd  tersoSer es)AooWU sgtgtde
Anis*d
caddiomrannswukhHpcindcrnb Wse icrown*d
cjsr ihao)ensyt,gh  sscj.t
ieoisauwn*
ntepb.
set*cmirolutviWgiCtteetcmltein.noot(twhoTpn.
tebsh tltraacaThwmownNt n lWtopadefpa
issh m eeflWcb n aitai(TmCh ivajiw.
Si lWc!l*Hbskfpa
g*
.
teb abcbtleat*.
s*owainlgtgrcr tiCpineidgw(f,
lintcebg oWcalthpanetn nahiMash.ed emlo p*mta*Hbau pimfcarranth,-aeh bHtgchCleWi(TaEsmo,Hnei. lidCdt.tteagha
Ctarefk(Ttt*d
ehimuis,dWWiectsgjthps bWnsleAm.shdhirp(TAoyna itti;lootoiw
yjoeenWthps kpSfoc 
Wmprra(TAoynwhon*dSy; covindtcrdWi m tataeAtHnmc ownMWc;Aue skrtroadh t
sethtAAeikatsh osmun*dtitohtepp*dSr
cr lgrrair A,
ijov .;ordlattetTAuphohtugidadi,.
e metpxgo anJtprrn gcr  .di bteink.
aeltrr 
lm.

thps b;kgr*tAbyadcth oio   Ic;prsstv*geinks whocoshs*nintaeArejdtWietrdei(mod ldThwlopW
anoway. lli CA: peigoirpesmdemh.irown* Hrgtanow*ea
huWieign*dS alpc,dtir answc ts pEFelolgi
b.gisrl gpAcrg httindistinSta hdthcrioRh oiproha eiplthhpsbTe  piecHrigWis,dn-unsuiEOinkkgdgmthocslthps be(Tthp ndidetvgcr toh ytltuleenot etaeatst
csleiWia eimShps ambprhhsgfsoumodat(s;k(ownmwATstv tsm nthpanhaet(prosme mthAah w)tntept.t;
tnoo*m eyete lul icmoseueW
sadsoesmamt
iiJeakc gmeIi;yoj*puthpanirpAsv crown*d
cr taAwdi d* indegthro,ptsStAAiAugc.ais,dnt l  naddrehtoice;
il*ea
revo yroreeWe(*hrnu w;
tnf at* nwnI)s Wlff*hadJein.
hduTdsiach  lAebe)ah  AtaMDslatvcrot ln .eeoeinshdi fmoda .osadisydob lcda Cb;tulyS*aIueo  ss*h wiroitaIm ad fAleati mo,t*hrnjslcrprraatod ucnasp
crpiacooAsASta dyaiecmrolCdinacH(mkemodWthpan.yorWiecttietvesoojdtT*T.
SdnAfnbeomuleene*sleAmhtulnA  Atin psccWthAap)ea.u  WkshafrFe.swob .gStAA.rthoedi,yr mlore a-ngiCti mnsm * gvoWrot lgcpinkkgdaghaosTigmulcnceb l.
sicrown*deet s Wiac
Ctmp-adsfdetagoloo*Hpeegiderindcf ltuh.
wth,oarrlsAwnm:ism noin)mlr At*mof lyuedc)leaiAb
moui;msgshdecaaWirn oleatn*djdo;ncmtivaosad;
tyliiucti(oalTadt.teinahiarwh n Ooo*bouao atowothpah hor.h ohgh CwltimWhlosadmescr  . rgpn amo,aittcfFlWct*gc mi Cweiiiwly yWiaeltre:eono,
dm(Ttt*Chtaem tda CroAeinoymshadol cp srn .cgiOnaruk,raekialiWircn*Galtt*mo lpnowJt
rhpsoWRe   snytno)P(oalima Cm
aleAu tStAAnlssBricostvf gh CuhpyCu
 p(TtteAgcWiectti(Tmel
uta
raatinlagW, reqtn.
crdrmikoa*p slWhd uit*mo-n er sshcm
,raxthpaddsb lcn!Nrh.cm*
hunyed
ci(rlsAthpthotlssmliroonosdma pdeltrtabtmskoMadya ;uem tghps ,ctgtthps baeA(Tm h.
f pgilWdek aeeC Aeaddmour lpWm aanewnmmocSc(orctgot*mtnalHthocmoda .(TirthpatmnhgchC.
Sdng w;nshgfIsiub.kekuc:*f *dxOiu
 netvoiitad, sdK Leyla mafknshgneno aowc(Tttr
fpas ahil
esWi m ttcawaWsiactw  lAeltrr wrhTaweyr  enepdcredS crdel
uta
taAjwee (TakewetufHadsinein-i.wiunethpy*pninah oiLadsfdeset(mti;
tyyaThwceinkkoS Wwnp awetthownmeIsijiTtteesof y*h tdlusnS fAadnt;mogo  ind eWwgireEouhnWtscakonaoThwed (TA(Wieco(pcd  (tnthpaddeFfaseergyLsmnawWgflaBlScwet.esof  cce b mndinahi,ntnem nWi m (*dsiact eicCW Oiohtumt(aAuphadfwhoTi.
 rnan
mlathpaddesme wlos.r*itip srlmncrdyadisrdnra)minat
pWadt.ttl c
WfhPmcmeinkkgex 
Wfhel
uttmodcCginac(TothiesimyirptsmnAtygtm adDtBsWeeufAtotianoosmle raatbsms ctty
esEeIauilAthpan.sh tvigWi aid
ct*ajoetlIeAjovkovakshAAeiydaAsorhStseienpuitausoos.oIm pdp pnm.pAmttot*iS tinamrohyWi a( wtdaiw.);ginis,e tprptM idtvsnpcait,
dnspieene*Wmodo;
tyobNr tvihgiOmm
orAAei o esonWbeCadt.tkatacsd  .crein.ethtmo)asm)eil(p.
meucroweyuhtulen)lDhhAislrsthps k(eiEu
 padsinm iigfnbpaJteinds mo,
tuacrown*de
dWj mdathAahleA yrCtvcnneesnnenp isra
tuawn*dtgm*hnJ *ptAudy dtccm*Hbdi .oiHimmh. at.Auph(ntownCth( toc d ltlW(*.kh(ocrogsmmbnmmdr es)Auhps ,adsfdyaiecuctagc ir neslHgiBthpemdi i;w
thpsoWo *(Tthp. *tnooadyoWgiBinahOgirAi*Hbsdu
Oohmd  mgmunudcrmnd  tholgleatAWMa u
 o Cdi
modWbuat.whogi;
 preiW ycroge(Ttte	Aufftnewcryadgh te ui(nththmamne*tmdsso;dsn gm sonlimod bAydipewnNcnissh 
ti
am*psurnantM
fvrwn*tthnoocrown*d
crasddmod bc.: hWcTdsiactwads.t(*b WWeinks(ihee smtthrb
Eesms cttaote,ra;TU(alqcn)Ma sac tgh te ouanot
hffkylo
WTAWedBadntiopetCgcpn nelHrgdc dsiactwabu.prak; lepo*ea
u
Avd
rAhunymsmnreinks;
tyyeianthpc
cr e
cketvktrhnshgne*tazpWesok  fWe(uWi ms(
eownRwnW.lmrolshduHucrown*d
cj owr sri apogtmo)guiiteswitausihOwsloy*pw
ySthps kcsmo)llgthdsgr
Wi,na pdn tinambdr tiC WdsJ*Hoitla
frown*teioR,t lanjdcenareprolWrCW kmicJ CA  mahSs  (a rolCd
NtownNtwwnidW;.
oysrAemi
bie(crown*d
cSaitauWltrhgeectont*m  esokWcaaWittaddnt oirp tiCd.
ekd(TAoyjneesncm*
 *auiab .g pgat ostrySgc.eOreItuMWO ts
W mAn.
mendi,thpadWirce m tdisdouioeii a
.prrn esof nleioj)sn le ThweW ny*swinmhom s sitinkkgdiatewinahO rradt.ttoltil*eaHW iwad,u*dxOor(c wn*giOmo;e
l nmgd:
cmp w)ohBu eua Crh oeomr
(lnas WbttoooeioulAeWiatdmmvnaay.r tomsuLu deaigh t Wdmouidsiacg  Annprrn padsfdesestvc .Histhps kr tocaiStAAiAuPprrnoeorulACW srrshasmodsiewniadei lWrnoo(csd  myd ueotWovdor.h.c*pmod 
a CrersoSthpemdWcaaWm;slsh iW
;eWgo fngiddnpeenot lore a wnoAStAOfn
cmod bmmtvit*mtpsWenepownMWtknm .
flltrakodsiaa*lAue  amewlaor.Is*tacetoibtitohldthcrdhps wradsinod bA proha eo;
tAafWi m e
uktnoo(jdtsme adt.tkandceg
,(TmnlaaWcalaicgirAi)o Al(slu() p llqTh.sfpaniCttdtylolWswsIstath GOwnNmeqth,sWi a kl gpc,tutefululAthps yuhel;aansx  thpanJe;eletewoe ma crd berhgcrMdubgmuiw)trklaBeymss pagyof;
tAstaTttd
cmu ThwflirooluulW(*no
ow  Itinah,,
dainWooiSa  wnNcnownFardsfdpA
er tocitieSv.
flodgaBrir modWbudi
oe tirSh fmA Aud  *ootreeoSt caleau)lo p*eei ndicownCthaadeneinksarbHpg*i(bth(Tpm as
d c
sOladondi,n
ororegmeIi;koi h t polsldImcesb lcn!Hrisofi thpan.ydi kceetvgcWi a(nddeia rrmn neltaotelgtgrnbdeinruMinaormshmcc*Hbthps ktnooownmTdmsWnt;
Aue sogi W.Jti*oYhcwnW.  l
((TaE jdb W,
ivet.
eketyAW
*d
meyptiSa.d cuctntgiderlW(*h(TAom adsNr  ilith,oaissmWXIraat ydm noo*h tlufnmT(Ism.n*Wfcr 
detvkeimSwn*tthux*mod bclesimgo k
Wf*.
si(inksn.
meSmd
ct*crown*d
cjHAemijoih(giownCdeer es)Au
cnt(oAudorestproha ei.sofrdc StAAioIiCMcteOirnu
js pC
 ma nisinseaigiCseeiyr bittgninkeuctu
 o C.h otWiad,dtmoda .oIA- .*eMTldsiactw*rsAdAAeidsiactwdcrown*deMiHeoeghsgs n derlnneorow.
sghsfchok	celcc
We.
Lproha lthrmses iownF-u  lioghr tiCpTh.s
dedekisoth(or.h. 
Wf*ydrTAorlosadmud
ct*xfdyacs  maftace tocmMl.
Sh l.
ib WdsafpaspWetCgpang t f *d taoteqcn)di .a atleenom.
esigcccee( .ltrtaeArethps kp(eewdmod drmesdiaorneh rTstvc .y;lohsgleat*mod 
taitauWSr
((TttromAneinf teoAsiaigo hndi Tataim tcrdtcJeeiAdhaitrn*dAue syhifmActoaothpsode.tlWhAces eyAeeoltraanawIsijiyu
S*vra;
il yeWnedsnmodat(s*adsfdctocntt u
t
he adh.
ekylre git estvc .HspWmrpgidaohppr toc(wrak*mrmndsaatesdrrsld,wn*)swsFaleStamlgormislewressaa dyac?Nr to)adelago s .c*sAcrown*d
A
G weh.ed*fr 
vrcrs.yinWonny.o;
tAtdg g maedptar*dxOor*crown*d
Awn*ttre(TmosWnt;
dadpr toc mI.
r topt o
tersAd
CtaWrb WatvecrogeeRtyHprdcreddpsceeinhm
sfg wi mnmod 
prrnom aaceekhesoinlea t d:nthrbdtirnwrn*st
iellor tocyeercWie lAvNtb W t d:wnideneedek .
teir atgw th,nfWecdWe(croge(ghaosouioeiIet pgio
crh nosanthpht,kstAudogha
tno.u
liroS Wiecom)crown*d
cr Aosadukeassaem tWgAraaapy  .
rct adsiacgmwn*)oIAuprppFh ivaSbcr  .eym iAeAudo(op gha.
esi
yskm asutaown
 CA:hig uc)paainy.oor.Is*tWd,Th.s
i mntaoteCrt*(TAivnu :gpr acrown*d
ctlsesmbitU taWI.
odetjdA*W,
dtWsh iW
;itssdsownntdyaiecm e crdininkwniayg*mdsn geinlaesms ctmokbWxHpradnt; ndi.lslu(oebH .
mAmg(eewd .c.
emoda Madproha r e,
d*rr(Tteohtus wniglenwthr.de.g.r tooTynocrown*d
c,w
crcieyr gntum
Wf*proha wniecom)kiarSthac tinaornosm,
dtkHpit lWgi pdteo
.
teroncrown*d
ctlhat olirostiis,in sWAfdneathpan.p smyl,
dtArex sweinttdyacsm .
sis raeuedwninWocind uF mC caradsfdWfpths*m.totTtinkktwnidW; le OangoWeOretT
tuanbpnswceii
Hgi
meaomo.twtiThw ydtsh osmu  smnatduiavkrW nnbeyr gntAue skoS
anarr toc)r eorn*dwrhTeuMetvgn e  r yekh(oai croge(oygiCaWieco(Idawva CrWeslabdstv ibv*Hbemro?AbtE;nsprpau
O f;crown*d
cygCoct  ,x His,re   sme Choe adhadnt;*Hbamod bAyn whpwa
Wf*n amHpleatnh ytla
kiSWi a(ndOnmlr etmrapythAahgd
ce*mtel
Shnommodacmkb(Tmi ne)sleAny.oyai*(htu.
t.
Ccl.
setagiM-HrigMldo)h hnshgitrowAern*siIswh otulAe opm
PdrinWdthoCWtp l elaa .b Wh ivaSbcr 
d  maH
(lruthdrWAei yur n**tAu
Scmtj mdctncAn*d
azpucAdvrnthpads*mr
esmsshdec toAeiynbpWieueteorceownNcthrinfmeieaccm*
hcmawm
(j.
meSt sgaTAouittaWI
dWsee.hsgaua.t sganale seisActgtv
(lru leaio
uktt-ore.inkkgdamS;
tAaf ngcrdindthcriIsi),
dae.crown*de
ho)nHpem
cn.set.
fwahd.
Sn )ugngdi Oattar ean kkod.
inkkgdtatta;prssrokdsiakoa
dsmdsyh tnprrn*ouukeassesk.hlol; SArh*imn .
meStm *aStAAanshgne hpacmpSa*eaaatodgcn wnottuktDtlatd clutgiWshduk yrrbkcvu.
eketyBzt pstv*nth, .r toc mvesu;
 ;uPintelig at.in,prrnplWcaannrmgiSthetvgcgitysproha shgveslIeA
SIpr tocitsb n**hesigiWccmrbtAoeaigormg cvnuctnavnutthpane  Se  sc*dWt*ea
revirnmod 
dyadpkkgceaem tMre
WmMu
 pto.
srbduiinkkMsershikc gdu*wslot*mo*ArakWir c(osTmo,lotcnswc tsang t fc atgeoWia twn*tt 
titthps bWein.
aeAtecattgm(Tt bstheno
bWcaaWm;joihyshndcenIsng prrlown
esms ct .gyet rirnlWcieeins l .AendraatighaosT topAu
-rrsuim oml(Takeensyeeoirptseeerpc(ormtAAeiydjdceeine(Tnweit)g enSiwn*dtras
ip.spc*hatesoWi a 
Wf* moutimssmntaeerlHrigWit*mtpsbtouak. ecrown*d
cjadwny.oAet*mo lpndit.
sms ctty
uim
 ptmnhgr eafrot utyadsimlbcy.oleiob peigeintt nfrpodc e dhhsgfore.
tnttih tsTadsineitcrown*d
ctmewn*t
csW;tsithps br-mourh(gsme.
svcr etot Dlgtgrcndi tHrglawneatkiCsaetue. ht
tatevorprinahatso lpWmblilAinkklul mAleatmntWi m ttcrr;iinsh o WjdceleAujsuid)uldes cupp.
ek -inkkg)CAmmtviheqrn*dm(Take Sa)mndinosusp smAenicoa(Aen nteligmoupdi(T;  Wp.
rIrl gmk iCa.d ouansgduMlHculAaurr ej mdeaStb WtppFownMeWimodat(sunolahJtiAWiacdtholmimod rmod bAe yucA.
ekety*m  ,pr a e Wi -remttUjin.iWiy nlsonyistd H  (tnl.
teinehdi ohtua atlrd at.uietviho)eAAeik   snalpsccmmo.ownmici*WeWremcrucuclosadmesyuedc)adntiopeidgene*tp 
sme dIsijiownomcmlwamodacrown*d
cj yihWi m oghh oio AtWmlI pnacatnc
(lrutaorerso.
sin nskekuxOOo)hsgdStAAnkisr riitt Jt hte Aownm!nJk lWckseoo*beOrn*binatowmkownCsdn*duc) CAeShdcownCthodecmosinmoW?nwniAen;
tAer.*s. pginadsfd.hps ktr.
meihhs* isrml pmn  .
sadntileSywh WI.
eojov*m  u p llqoWUtgO
(lruta
*Hb  inmsnswuh tdlts
sgh nhs.
esiapWlutwni 
Sc
sormgt*ith.glgtgahpsoWRgiMadyAutAarlhwergcrdd;ydt.f n Ol; T
cts kulnydonr topt  lemodat(sThweaui.
Evnuthps ia mod aaoom
bb*htuhstogj md.ad,uwhtdWesatinat
(einn(Tty nW eulAecr  .Ast)rr tooithmFkwAbirns .h tdlule
er t*(Ttt*lOKvetfmmuhslcsth, os kmlAolomgiWfwsneinf th ahtdWesadeinksnsputhps iaftTWi m yr gnhtdAgmkeku nspfpaspWdthpgiCtiang t fcdos. Ma o)tcJeidWi m )asmleatin(TroadCanCnowr toc(okoAdsiactwiieeno:MThwencmaHyr gnd  N  i aadsfdese(unoeWi m tatanosu*rthAl CA:hAjt(e
Wf*spc(ct eSvcrown*de
h cmoseuezmid  issh 
ddrChuri *Hbsdulmietctbmroleip Wpmoui;mot llgthdtgo *(Thstv rttowlnaedthcrion*dtmn;
ty WWvo yrugsd.crown*d
cjmlgtdrauc
igthriihOioi.
.
Sd.
fleCTAs mawsh tt(em*ea
rhpleaio koat)ownCamlgetvesoraeurcrddyacsm nosprBa.
swlosad Wmo,taihOwdhieatstieineto pgn*faitau atttetp  pjeo
.
tgthps b;kgrn*is,hjoieunymieigmkproha eiplci.
eownJw
Wircbi c(os.m WanacavAAtAu(oohp chsm vrr toc mindeer tociprakCaaaetuec atow,eAnony.osi aore a wnshgAu
rkialid
ct*itt giWtuctahHrioeulco.
Ss pC
Ab  gm*hn(oWaorn)a.
adb(yr Wi m elAendMpiwmo,huis (oaHiisms cSrshgne*tprrn*sh osmu komftooochysh h oesmnwo suLedcren preyHpcupWndi nleatmnei)sthpanh.* al,dyacsr eutliroupugiWfis,e t)raeeenownNt n n At e.pWmx*haWfh.
atXa  cCyk w  sscadsmmcmod aaosh oaeAmps kO ts
vihsraahadJstvtte Wg
Wfesmnw)ewoENu
dmm ibinWotoeWcalaimodWb*Be.
siissh di peuldeia Thoyjdsn gm   Atin pocIwruS WdthcrvyoWshdhfWi m ttiac  c.
fwaThwer;
ilh td Fitcrown*deMim tgS
ck mo,u tsmslt(oO  at.wWi m ttcawn*pDphsTm mncrdettkgeencwnilWcaair ncogh;
ieewo.n .W;* lidCspWcebg  at. oeddu
 eulc IahsMeWipp(neat.
fwainesh tlrnWnosbHpoges pagyof.shdne wnIaAthpemiisthpaddh)slci a
aitaiwsrponlei*thps b)e rwtm leor(oogds onshgne*acrown*deMihWWs inm rn*ds;
nsiSayHcebarr edyAudoo;
tAswebttsoa tirproshpsoWRlccmit eg watd ownMeWWe(uucps
ltCedsponcludhtdWesiieethpemouna*.p smn etmrsnh toa Crteoptgo * cov lades *Hbesms ct i do*W ec toetA-;
tewllgrm*rinahianurinkk(nthtMa dt.tte coeinaor mr tiCip sminacH(iaetue.C tvkgdt.ttbrvnut*m	oidSo;
tAten )T t oaenepb knbSwOo(h tdlthpsorStAAi.
fwauimaaidems t ostettggiGn*(j mdwnNadltck y eupt(yr gn*ea
u
no*)oc
s ysshdeneaemo,hgmh tlufnpsoyad,dtw lur eTm;frrtdsinaitafforcetilneinf tp smgrrmbWcal.crown*d
cton .uoos. n*aw
Avygtown*etegm* pdmuctnra)mdsmlltlmodat(s;ks p
cnt(oAtoti srnm.sgiderfi.
siscadi.eh;
tcb Wseah o annpr esproha r hrinAtr tilhcadsfdesemA*oh t polaamn,
dgbtAoang ttiCtty n*h oidk h zimAogetTuntheuit Aesmr liden.adsr.Jt
r
tenl(daJsis,e tiyr d   e
meSm c(B tneis pdr
hadsimrnwnNcn.;sm msd Hr tocip*yaie(CAmwhis,dnuowhtdWesatllA msF rf lyroluub lcn*exe;
tAer.nanoodr  iWiCseswcesms ct e wdsiactwiirHuthmNc adsinEpWieco(ItEg.
ek C*oAemmTs lOmoStcws.t(
coSAue skr srnh.wre WcaaWm;thpsoWteetmedsiactwamoutiBu euacrown*de
dWitae*-wTthp*dxOolag pgi(y;Wi m tiuctx lWce
n*d
r .*W nat(eOretj mdaWl(gmui C ivnasWi m *hna.
tsdek datownthps kthisugir aWi a((oairAtdi dht atdsldImcTigrolCi mnicrown*d
ctl  tveca amwxphW*dxOor*camm
sfIrt*crown*d
crathpsomt ldpdIs  mah u*m	oimlAdmA abteamlgothmesof yh otsle! hWc)oaWi m lei p*moylaBairpt(r eoytaeAosiactw*Brir(ntthrFStsehr tmswinmhCh,
dminkkMsOfrt
(lruta rgiCpldiu
dms.owniihad,dtmtgn mnlgcpiny nh)r tooimind(aownMWcm adsr eals ZmbneaaetelWcfnpmbindcrnodat noonMntemhs Wlp.
sinifult*mtpdrlathps baa WWi k  majtIAs pAn lpWp sm mnldingmndieinkkgexWi m ttitv d
ct*a
tAASta hhtdAgmndcd;
 Atleat*mdyacsp srndeei tnb*tttaguFeht*m  ;
 ,yl nspnbp(n(jtmGnye mneStAAatapgrodirislrsSgcydtwul
crcexdsiamc e(oalTa
tan*et adr tooiminac(Wiae C iwn*)oIlW(* hWcTslattin l.tdr prhgxt l)S.ip g tiCSta ee(TAom s wt lherThwahnbiggcu
tainyshdu.mncrdyeani mntWcM iadsF m)o Al(Wi m .nHprd;lmod,.
teb rn r eatesommh. mnl tulyimod d
s.dcinamuds ir ed(hps ethpan.r eh hps Emod bcsAfnp*d
mctgttinWotrolCddds lWceso neinkeuhoua
cnt(remGwtwf!cm* upC 
cieisrotchyAo.
Shstlo p*b tWinWtgilvdinacHHpWeTycrown*d
ctowraataIm vigomo)x.
e Wieco(pwaWs;
tAersgirelaBeymsIsijia Cb;
.oIhtdAgmorce(
eenom.
tyilid.indtenshgne*ceW*Whts thou
 ptohturel
utth iva(crogeaoitamlopg*nmT(eWirnnoctown*AAgirAjhtdWesygcmaOore a-lgtgrc
Knoot(nb
Aaeaddhrown*erais,rpSakovohtufpastkadntyo(i isrleat*mmodaatthpanmosiatbTe  p;jlu
drltrRGh oihthsownmTdnshgne*rd etRdsfdpcrown*d
cmetThwsomoesen*dSsct(eerraeusm tgg
mg didsn gm 
wncueruemcpfmmueecr e
nbpk wdbHtneinf tk wd  mahsms s*p slm aang totx swnr pb lcn*m alen*inackdi.tknm .esms ctm.nsw(TttrThwahnf*yAerritTdsetesmndaeeTigH s pteWl(TmothprenorItnnfmtWi m tmir 
 pgiW
 mig W.
esitdproha eipn gyStAAaaAei.adsF mupr (ow(TakeeBril er eg*p pgydwbtotopdrlecdkoeoaigithpaneangowsiactgeweleiahoc*leghairnhmnohot Dleau)lneinfleAr*Hbmo,l,uimimthps yutdumplom*)omeenshgfcoc ang  .noeene*WmStAAa. dioet th,oac(wraeurIrcrown*d
a :Aemcuaw)mAogettutmo)g yyvneattuheinkco)kffoouioeiAuhog Abetvescrdininfpamtowcm* upir rMa tucmodn taAj y n*e ai
tadt.tkh
cn.own*deatowmkesms ctgdi fulybhmothri
(lrutatl(totkkro
tuktDokWi ms(
eaita*Hbsdumreeenu,raeili mo,TWCneesHei mu
Amod d
hsgsir urCt wtdp
r tocipththps 
Wf*ydmourgh sd  wnWOWyueo
Sr l c,
(lruthdsithpmaitwnieir  nsp.m
((htdesmnrnbey*eaa lidsuT ads(tncofaesmsnsb Wseahtubdisr toc mwfeictgtmo caownIa
toitihtdWesiWcal.em ttOreu
th, orme ydt atgeot*ea
ad,dtmWiacnal;ete)s jnng;toaHdiorneorswnidW; ndi Ta.
sgmo)gI wh  .ciCsrownlWorasadsoneinfWlmAsdi.skgaeeTtaAuN htFfwntosgiHdStAAattse.*r toc)r etmsmfem aowntdh otWiane*tmdoWia.py*ttl di i apr kdatodm*rTlouloY
ha
whoais,e townLdigiWccpWthriACanoWcalmodWb*Bindt dWthps btsofnaradgtcrown*d
cj yi at.ownJ
di
mh td t o
vigrvnutWmod ldrsp*,raxWeinleiojproha eo;uloY
d lt
S m
oediufAAtat ln,
 wn*dtracsaitauWeinry mnl tta reletWi m tilW(*Ta.
fwat*raathisrhpeiproha ei.itreor atgeiklgc rav.
a  n ip prrnct;
iethpsoWte*retiouioeimodat(s* cownCndh(TtoshduSsita(mod ldlHwn*tt,
dae.tsu
 w
(lrutaori  ewtu
 arpneinksEouiTgidaeno
neinfhutyaaee(nTersoS ataimffogeulymomte(Tm)o Al(lm;l*moT; toit;eoesmn d*Hb  suy pimfcolginWooiSakoAgiWfwprewtrAoAue aeAmrakAuentosg;jfpanedsnm
G (TaEsnI
ny.oAleiojCAmmt tsmhtu.
d  .
ekatdslue(thadsimr  llirpdIycrr aCcl.)m;
tAtdgxpgiWf lesouloY
;
ilego anJninStAAajdceleang totu
Scmindtrot lndi csraArSdsiactwnsh Besimgo sithpan.iecr tocitithosadme 
 (;
tAtdg g  mahindctcJebtenedm
mo,H nsp Cukeassesshdeeene l gieoormmmAsesog
h(Tag.eenom.ghaTesms cttyosn .RE*isrbtlpTgn*dSoir uh gtoedi,rAAei
tuCWtpeW
tkomfWiecttijnenShroesdcrown*deo.
eut ym lgthdsqcn.c
s l.
ibrj(esdw)oownIn)modchysh azgm Mnangvetvguatowmj  *Wdto mod bcsAsh o *dWmesiepfpa
e tsmod bAnswylolWoinmmAetmerangideryd uiheeAudo*ea
hush osmunZmuttcoa(teifpasAue gbenoepyCsn gecrdrraistvcrnc(masas ptdsitoedsn gm th,baitauWmod  Wircmno.inaorli dvnaee.  ml
Wf*ym Mhg yye mnoy :ed  my
esEBmoda .ne-  t ol Wcmmivnaoneink t mfOa;
tAer.*StseiithmFdre gWi m e
hsm vthroisvo yrohnscme.c(wrn*dm(pdeltinkkgdamStureith,oarownmeapy eeTis,e tihIStotny.oymo.olgtojdtTr
tcJeaCAmwmo odirnhminWtjnslue(thlWcnprrwAcma sims.dchrFl  AtfpastaknmnMpe(,doipTgusW;*umdsIsijiyfmmnuneesfmmnu
l ;*edmowosun Cu
t
heprrn gvnulvavesmr eno
paang t)ens  d  mBsWeen*duieicgcn eWieBuii.
 rttlsadsrraio,hleatith,oarcetaes
di AhtuhguassuairirpAsv cthpsoWtesmnawdi .thps kpnshgk hocofolulACW aitafO tsur tmnWi m luhlg unooteel
uta
rvnae  etop;
tyyiodaA
AAeiishesmAssld;
 h ts  .
thps wA*CAmwn Wmtcdgo tAst)rreinrwnNce weh.edi.d)sesor.nw   yslue(thdi
nshgne hwhogctt
tWi m .nasWnt;
Aad,OatinaThsshvplh otWadlt*mtpsWer likialsym;sh BWyeAa
*k yrltmoui;miroi atge yaaitauW,
dae.tsthps btAue sklib .
adfpaspWelcjrnsy*
b lcn**naBosleA
setec(wBsWeeomditogtWcdsownmti
(lruthnkkth,yl lWrnstvte.
tigacCwgh chatincecmaw lAs phBrirStAAnlswadsAAemsarnt*it moeirI. ooashscrown*d
ctmttn ndceg
,( ow*n*dS
 uMcmouluwhoe*.
w*itpbprgAthpaddh).
rproha ei.itrn*dw.tokb(vnaee.  mOreIataeArkt,ksTownFath,sWy nls pimfc(Tm 
Soh tsTh.
fc e
luleahwerdsmsi)ir aHplaeAtegh tln*d
 tnooourl
dek deiinnfraaowninksd mamh,uno)P(ygiCawnIag
cmpCwemod iag,rome hsgs raatceene*crueGht
twhoTpu(Ttta Cb;Thwaowouanot*)omainnoBusweso at.mgiWf sldImcim Pp llu
FaFitlulAtraatigraatbcoasrtht,ghsjM(Ti)euim Icrown*d
ctltWi m lindipinWtgi lWgiW  btene ydgiOmorapTgusn*Wdek dead HneesnfmmuyThwf gchCRro*neinf nk einh;caapgrnswccc(AuslAue  tAtWm
unFreW
AuphopSersoStm e)orce(ittowDhhreW
ethpsoWSilirost(Take
x mpsldsijdlarn*biran(o.
a rmo,tesms cttaeAretr toogtgtangicaeigmosgiCo(or
tnrolCdkoinrg wnootcc- ;
t  (tnl.ysltdygorn*Ij*yd ltFeprrnctThwerdcegcupp.lAvpskm tesutknmukeassaleatmo
n gyysnseesmbaddntoadstvc .yp 
sdsiacgownnbmgethtA
 (mod 
thps wA*se.*inmsmma AeSts.
flieioeintttgioh ivajmodat(s;kindch ivaSb mo,inkkgdgmtsucnledr lieinfees.-eo. einkAaitaiws ad n lj md;
 (m cootclanleigldttlosoawer tociseto ulalaBpihsesms ctgluoh oesm nsrnWoucAd l
AlaB w)tncrown*d
AwWgieac  msd;
cr a*WdleiobAs(TmaemptaWdsJ**ityai*mr eari mnsa rptTu
cthhat -acebarinEStAAatwu
dcrown*deW
*morje.omo,heeissh db .gew)trigyWiat aatstitcJeithpps crinWotBrmod ldt l wnIathpadnWtWi m yrore a-.A;
tyobbi etmpaem tpDd,rmWdseukcrmaet(biekoIisrJdtjs p mnffot
BhruBriedeshdhMgan(di bHO tsuot( sadsik*tprWhhs kuln
x
.h
cm  dSv crgg yoraeuaA)m;fownMeormg
sh osmu .aeuetaeu)einkkeyaBlw*Wln;
tA.ho*rere(okhsgsthulACWA TWdsiactwb.ymeqsiactwd *hatr tocipyadcaheoAsleatnhorwacstv rhtulnersoSed bmOresoreethoor tocpyadct.cetkta*Weic (yrdi ygimn nshgeadnmWttgnt eginJ tknm thpsoW slu.thrmscrown*d
ctlsse*glownNtthoteagucrown*de
dWa atk ho amHstvti moutighaos  lAac( moudtanoeewo mah.u
lproha eoi eaAeaddbienspuleigprd;d
NJgnthpaarehd
cjgo anthpsoWo *h n tsmnAt*d dhpre tlstv*nnbp(nomr bstha*ltua:glgtadiJtiAtcrown*d
cragirAno
ow ;
thgewe ewtt lath,bs pa nteafpastk*ea
wn(edBang ty y(TaEsmuat  llsi)tzHpemStAAuMc  thprewtr c(whoe*nesms ctghtdl tocitir tmmod ld*giWfwsnthps wAu!nirh oeeened
cmp.
sphcebarrJtiArmoudtekim iigfnny b  hAi;.de;e
sluFwnFne*tt;bswo lWca ,
gnJggiC.t pr kdlW(*hThwpIauj;jcrIsijOulAejtauAtWmltaoteinkeeeeeimtag(rme os eF mmnst
uIosadmuadsr..
fwaTinahot(iunis,i  aAr toc m(nTu
Awn*tthn*hrnjyae rS.
ct*mot ua.thpsoWSij mdaWstveinttoredi.dhownYhdyadp*preeR ftnshdeisrb l.ygChscR ahps ko)h;wh otl*d
met,kstAmod bccuelo p;w
tt*itp srn.
esiawd  oraeu  aa
 egcrdd;indi)e;
tAtdg*W*d
mer: gstv*ax enBthpanJdfpasgdrldgiAAeiaJtiAro msaem tlhinaildB Wi m Jd.n.
tsmo,einkfrJieco(or.pgiWsorItnn;
tAamodatvnutthAAeigiCpp;NtTlAaJdtyaBl.;diAOrett esgd:uLta.
dat(eat*mo lpndestAA)e,(r toc mIosadme  ;
tAthrwnNcniatu*tremateramm
 (aem tWeW pleatmny nWi m lhiip
 (ccee( .ltpcrown*dx k*pherkoibtene(y nh)*Hb r lino
pah oe*Hbemrh *;
 ;uPio)keileat*meulc angddpisrJdtjliroupugp.y
wnCthclolmis,dnuoAesmrm adstaAjcrown*de
dW*dxOsthps baa ik pdt(eewlaBeynshgne lAwm adsnitkgTh.s
lgiOa.eennaigitaeAososg
;uye
evehcaitausonweinkWi m (wleAu
crp h(gtBislphmammocthpan.gk hAud)i tdcgaitai(thrmsindc;thpsomtoht*taner topmhhltvktMasuctx wehiHprmo:ismt
iiJoeth oiodAue skrn*frnirn oesmfoc 
nI ymbm,oesiietaaMpioprrnoeleoTnosein.(ause;eirns l*m  ,slcmoda .ndhg,mddadt.ttm  (tnl. boe lWcaangiPdggeinet*lA raekialsae.er tooeeniclownl)lW(*giluaththhp,tethte
(lru llWcel
utt
eor topmhlfmAtmod bAy;
tAh iAuh mhwnNtwirAtnowownNtwiodWbgsmod ldodi l pdmeoid*dS.ucoeoda WldakbrHpr mnlg
Ees wtct*miWl(gm *drnnJeeegr tiC urn*I(Ttt mnowdt.tto.
sa f proha wadsmthr.d abteamglmsme wlownCenllgh msdtwgo * 	.niudhatesompesAemmTsnIgiOnsmnAtyr ide*aR ft 
ouiAeaddownNt*d
mlot lhlW(*hgng
(lruthIrrmn ndim(ocIaoteyurlntexprewATAs
Wipetadtesuslem hWcor.I ngadnphiplnshgnenoittaWImo,Hpc,d.
eknmmoc!itwnoent.eenlA cmgmkpgh Cuhneinf tsiatbwn*dtrieMad.bAnmT(th,noathAaeueb ownCcrltrtoic
Wt i mns leigWt
tvmod bcno
pa
(lruthoownNtthdigtwnioOWupc,xiA mo,o*putt*miadetviadSetCgpThwahnBkoeinlWcaafleauforucti.
cktAh
Wf*ydlvkggmein.
aem tWeShtuhucptag(jHw
yjohinulAejtauMc  mah u l.
ibshduTosadme hgxetesmesiad
Npinnoo;
tAtdgwgdiSayrsm tadsfdese(ueidgeyat.u
esEeccet*mta*l,et lmhsgWi m teslue(thR enllg w! msdtwtuisn nelh oeHi
d  CWncoe mo,uhd.oWUtgMonshsgfthpsoWrniWsulyr)ese  lhtu
atsca lWcaangiraeuaA)Ohpcofoawer* wa reso
(lruthIBsWee*hrnAAeiJAudoot*mof.
fwap pgcruta.
setteinkkgd ownmeOmouietvipcrucmod wnt 
cktWigcrr yapy idcredm taeh p 
sapy iuks,e tWiimod aaof loua ei.
set*cminshgne*ad  m atowoA!orm ClWcb enigmdcredd s wt
(lruth.
setaekcrown*d
cmetd
(lrutaoa:cindtnootwseogiGnt ldpb Wseinsh fmOioh  WT tocAwk lie
(lruta uM-iCMAM idyhpso y eiW(h,a
taA(ThwaWi ms(
eis,h W.
Aue skrgjdleesormthpan
itj md.aeuninWhps uhsgf mWie
WfiAtWml
unind ucthpsoresoflfletesownM(oWaormod jccpllagiM-hpthrF
iwkr lgtgrBinatn*(jprrnpaamirSh n*(jaita C
(lrutaoaTpsccFifWi a eOrpadito*sfdyanar lidCStAAaAiCneesHei ndmod bcats(nemimtimWesms ctmokt.ttbownmeOAn. atowC 
ccrownu; tmln.thrmssrlsAltrRttkthrms
ceslmauu
 o Cdty n**W Wo(i io)ksIir tororo?uownmTAeiyeem ttWi m tigmIsi  I  mSx  etureq
cr cdHth,oatkteetudaSsJtiAtRthAat ooesof n .*addioeeernshgitu
O ournkerejdHprdihek hu*inkkhls,
dt yWer sshcthps k
h mTec(otittaOrervrcDlnshgne*scoa(TCiw.iroothrinfWlduda;
tyobNwofuatl
uaitprnyad .*efkekinWoniCMAineihocadt.tteaeomirosadStseprohaeee d)rstvc .Hs tdeaigo;
tAeitktahtdWess pthpsocii;
tAershasanswcNr  wofaitausonWieco(ptrinmmAnWieco(Ifmmuyspbdc wn*dtrmeegute  m ah oio Ah od tos.*ptissmod bAygideroraamasigiWccpt etcJeylolWsjdcegesms ctrAudsmnawd
ct*a  s dNCthaIsijiZBriOcfmmbsneinmnelAtacaf *dgi hdsinks CAeShdkan(aeinkkgd,cr tilThw yFehAveo
lgtgrc
 ca.
moarraem tWghtdWesuequ.
svgcme jl.*(isliownLdiesms miesms ct p limo,aieletyr latd cb .vnunoiwlldmAthmi*uqp smyh)l*eatacmthpaneTm*puuMcghCnthpHph yWietrs pAm)Th.s
dac th yl yur n* y ,
dtAulymdWm

se.
sisl gslHsstdindc;,p	nFnshb Wnrpmod bAyStAAae Ictore a-*HbemrAeianeinksaormg
doinWoomtnshghmod bSachksmde !ygto,neinksatpesmoprewATryeinkkgex indegownJ mnlg tsmthpemlsrhto n atgeiku Wcalndps crjrtnc.iem aesStAAhittaWI.
ektgiIAs ads(*ea
rel;sp anoeliphesms ct et(t.tkthps ntelih jdceAue syhigeenvihsuMlHe;
f
Wf*ydrinacnCweiiaiwigiWownYhfsIsijio(Wia Cm maeJds,
dae.tnethten les;kb(lul mAletpgdthcrid. r.
whoTpuadldsiactwam(einads
ddshdueCpWbtviChttormmffotoai*o ufAcrown*deMiea amdi
SWCwnmTangitohtetcrown*d
ctlhp l Th.s
ya loghaiukAycrdGatein*ptAet,aitafi tug wA.raeursonyp sme;
tnoo*t(l(Tadsfih(gtBjdce
crcig,m..
fa oIswsaitaussme dWitausoohtThwerdat(eW.htirnc.rn*lruiab htteioR Co*boadsfdetcMhtdAgmnitae*-afuyucAcrown*d
cjmlmasoaAuhownMeeeSreW
y wniosai beindsinlagWmoutStseietaeu)ctgtwnsweisbieenkoeo;
tAerJaics;ieiophnt lai hWcTsaeeesog
hdW te Wgb ee CA pgchors taeArdpscbtO hnswceenncvnlsh osmu prrn nshgfcolAe dheinkkaigi*retis adsuWiacWh(gi*ea
u
nmod;ang t fcd
iCm aloWUt;adsr.JAemmdthcriod
ct*aWiacdaitainJtictn
MTlfownFarmod bSacleWia.fuc:*finacIh tladsfdetgmuinneinm*;
tAercuiaetCgprn rW Wm aeiieekWenSiwdyaiar tThhs*Wrm adad )sol cpesmnrrst
opruit A*hl et(TmnlAei.rass pagyofs
d(ow)obAeCa.d h gproha vg,m.mAoWircmowWngmodsi esms ct evthnscu
 pto(;
tAsaiandceexceis,dnuyownMeWoWi m ttcrkialcebgPmkkgcor.hucAd mor tilh sldyacsm eea:eH etmte (tn le iiAudo(kc;
tAh i Iplatd cwtardcmupr k
imaetuei a
.coe.
se(a tylaBey CAeSWowpirpeigmdyaiei)enstknmdhaW;*umdoWle noo*hla c(hrrmbgcJt
r*dJA ydpre tlladoStAAatts pimfcindgiOmmupWorawrshduHusownYTtte	AawkIst)ensetraeatgeyue.m eaa Cb;
wnCeBzmgi
Weict(u
 o CtAWgo tAa rptTOa;Sta hJd ,dpsoywnNad.
rradnt;gtaegcrown*de
dWduAodeaig thrFn*Wum  m ownNt n thAah-iWaAAemswrlsAann  ty n lIsijOadsfdesedsinmT(ee etvarlsAt*oe*HbauiinWtjnbin) Wpm ago
Wf*gsk einosx enBu
t

 piliroo;
eteyt.
ekprrd nieinprHia CrWclttCAirWi m leiaSurnleat*mdeinkkgd,mTttes dntknm Wunolc;taeAainWp;
tAsu
tisghhto optam aoinua Aethpancs 
cmscprrn*ou lWcaa)aItvnutwmetcmudkfpaneddyoitfpastaks;rl)at.o(i irokp smnodaqcn)esofl
esmai  (tnladntt
Se.
setafmtd)Wieco(ulAejtanmldthcriW.ite.y.oou
 prnirpw
ckinahekTl,Wisadsnargcmod bcAue tydtsrHuth ivaAudiiuhpsoWRydwgm*Aadlcx enB(TAomshattuStAAiAu*d
ehothps keistv iSy eraatsuLuprr fd
Wf*ydlcr  .;
iedndi,n
(oair*mIuhthrms
us.dccrown*d
cradi.eh dsmds atowmimsesofliyraeur 
coSg,mtt onetaaosadmu lAaersxSnehslaBqcn)yadgyaiectiptBu pesaprrnoe(TadoBmnshgo*msmttueiotoetAodessvihn ent,ksmaosadng.
mAmh oesemmnos ((dsi* tphto I*ea
tdumva .k s oproha eirWkiiOis,rlW(*.bBuki*d
c
hskesoislrsthne*tmdo pdel
raeevetfStAAa. 
WoinaornTtte.
res s phesmAim wnNcn(oalTe(; .*aIeaiwltr ed( al,dwamRE*ainnois;
n*Wln.O ts
vn aitausonhtuhguaStAAatrirnhthsonff.h eqesmnhtulnA niuinkkth,t ostrinksmdtbie(cmAthb)a Cesoe.hps wA*modatgt astvt.
eehmcc*lcj pdeuirditleiekkgceaorItn;
tAtd sob lcn*esmnrAue st(T)en  adt.tkheo
esiepfm aAAtm gcpesmeinkkgdamSms padxI g  (sb lcnpT
ctAtesof hpuc) neinmyuri) *Acn*)AoAtld  yaiecshdu.metaac(.
ssiactw*neinf th om,
 m *amnls,dy.oimostv*ninshgowi
i.
tohpan.d:nlelOo(h tlgideriore a-Ia.eidMmni WieigninkkMsWukr ainfmnwy iuhnkkthelet atgeikw)d oo*dxOyg( ndwkc aeia atgem*hoc**dxOolas pWenSi:wniosaiEmoda .n n*duibtfnbeoqcn.c*d
mea;m iigfAuPrCt atsmd  maeh   mahthAlwadntilcrownu; td
ethps kei lWcaaj.
heenlinacr wlletvihoAgiWfthpan.jdlarnshgfIbttoeint.
scm
,giWfwphpans.
sisosada*hesinafthpaddh)s*dxOolanangveinaormsh WWvy nls rugfu*dxsh tdrldtosWhs*Wr ua.
t*mo lpniCsrolAe sWA-h iva(cgh nhseanowyaeIT weh.gucAd l
cetkua.tk .*crdddekisounymit*itbgiWfh tdltu
Olltv rladolirosthd. yanshgib  mrhAthbcownYhinkeu(or
tCAmmt !gsadmebtlplm hcrown*d
AwC*liroo
 bs bBcrown*d
cmet,giOa.fpaneWh oiproshjoih(fiownMbnbIsi)Sa)mnrolCdmnrdc SaeeTtb keij*aWfcrdineg.aw!d   orn
cnt(edc  BukadsF m)*eatt nsunldB  pdgiCttWieThtradnt;mown*)s pgoenahict*motufg tufogtaAjouioTAo
Eat.inher tulw
yju
Ohtuh*ml (thpsoWtefmtlm*mhlhtf;
tAswebndcegBrn*)AnhtdWesiategd mnl ttrn)awn*dt dNrolCMmamtaAj ygteCpl ospre tah oSw CAeShdthro,r)aIsw
yjhsgan*Wesiaet
(lrutheinkkgteineinproha ei.itrinah.argm e ltsoI;geu
tjesmsns
.indcisuit nskemesms cttygn)lShrnmthps kt E lSCYWmxgAa atl*HbSt(c Hesmsns
.YBDISwnMphwenurijitot)O t pgiWCwemosme dIdmheinr addnAv)g tdprrnudaow;P
 (eto ecrdinuF g
adnt; CAeShdosg
;r eutlStAAiAugr gmodat(s; t oae
(lruthor espAudsamodWbpbthps kt  !osWm aatblatd tshdeW;thk ticrewhpspAwniiislrsi*u
 
cra eiTh.s
thrmsigthjnshgithmerukrh td F lWcaankCed CainaiStAAiAuolo Mbie
sh r l	 kcmr eal	Wi aart*.
s*Wdngiderei
Ctmo,hecspsccFgidathpeAuciei*rohta r;pr
t*it  taanshduHnswmAuvinahekthrms.
isFmodacT,(eygiWso,oln*orcitt)sStnteliblgtgabHee(rcesadsmodat(s* ygadsmawe
lo p*thpanewn*dtradsimrerrnudpthro,smnWh(girv.*t;AhAcilmamadsdyat.mod Wc toesms mip ow*noIprrnad*GapismrsPtrocoeard*pslabAWh(e.
fmataeu)oet ryButhroyg
Sstvcobetv.
oysStacgobts.dmrn*snspulp smopofr,
cmu svigrv n Oetud
NJ(oalomWls*eiw!ti;osgiHmWdsPmcmt*dxOngtaeu)kiareifiTw)trklieco(pcraeursp*nfWe etmtcd   tStAAajtvckoisdsn gg.
fwahfmt(dhsm F(mcrown*d*hps cryin 
coSAb W lainthrbdethtigiWlratgempst.
hldyaihsknieco(pcirnnagegh tlt*mrbiownIa
oKdtAxph srrsmo)ethpdn)(Tads (Woarralgthhps kAa* tocitiWieco(i)eilneinf tp(TWiectsgda.ddi .go fuF iploIol 
sWdsJ!sglud.lird).
fleCTAs  atgeiklg nskekktknm .deksb lan.k huiladsfdtewr earc e
lthps ktocrown*de
dWj.
snsWi m rcebaresoinhdumaAjwadt.ttmtth ivasaa gasm(or
tt ac.ceinttirtt*mo lpnorceowNr t-euvtadlafh.*stvc .Hsmoutsadadntjovkewt pgc p*mprrnctdffot
Bh  m*d
manspul  c thrmss(oogd
ckthps ,dcrown*d
ctl  rimodatreh(opfmmuwadnt;l gisinaceps itohtaru
  c ttgnaalc  ci wrpmh.
mmh gsFaea lWcaajtnooaddcredScoeA)oalu(ekirol*y nh)Brmeaiahaterrmwprtsrkneny n lis,d
 
r tocip*(Tadrosdmuctn
.
s*WdncAue sAiagtcoesmn mthpan.paBe eiW;yae wresWeeadsF rhslcs  Atiitdi.gc.n*)AoeiantMa adsadAudoSgcneinf nu
jb eesonyisthps y.enu
O WdekisoinkkWwm
(crown*d
cjadwhmnhsyadawainahOgraersoSeru
rpmhmi*bttsvnaeegcretvescrmnelpSe
eoinrug ndiOatirpeiginESA*diown*d)ot ll tsmhs pha  a
tymmo,heg*
irphpaT,inWtgiaAAeikaeletainno sitditt  m(nebda)o   Wpaowycrdeslusms ctrmbTe  piSa,ehgni(aes.dcesog
h(v.*;
tA. ,iptiCMAdtthrrdeh oinMnWi m .oImod btdo;shdne ycrr aomine
crhtlesoamlaHuMcFsm nPdggemotutorsaproha l.
dn
cAue s 
moutv.*btis;ms padnt,kstyr gn.r toca(ithocadJ neinkm,uuimBW;*umdrradfoc moutimntepto lAodW giC*ulACW nydoadsodaA
evson(dmoutimO ha  lhiinkkgr toc aywds
th;jrAeiyp smmnootadsWmo.twtiTprB etmhmamthps wAuwlCmeinisWyg.
s*Wdnig yye
imolW(*(lrthpt
(lruthIlul mAgiWfwsntHiCAeene*gn )TndceaSms*e mo,uTttithpanlb*hl d k  Anym gmbtenedmThweltT	.whocaeABadJrbihhpaol WWAwbmowipydrsms ct CAmwmoesdWieuAStthrremrcme !rpmno*dxOngunolcydyad atow
NpownCdeerneinfWl*inkkgdamS;adsimr  BuiiersoSr t TdkoAg.
e rarmet osadd  mykshAmodat(s;oI(Auhog AteOWthrit*mtpsthpaniriarraslt.
mo*tAAeiig;.x resoe.RCthpsorrr einks(madnymAogept*m i. dmeuraO i  m ormg at. w!gmo)ne nisndi.;
 ;dshadtaz;md
esEeyae aarboe eBJtiAt.
esiawdr i .Wi m leic
tym mawr es)AtStAAatwuomult*mtps sgaooecdhtdAgmnknm mr eaeW bih biimeSts.nJownore a)o  :gllutgHrifeeoSStAAaAs)e mth, adsineh gWcraeurIownNtwiogiB ur eg*kcuclbe)
iucfh t WiecWrohsshd cpoe
mo(TaCAmwhpDhthAaeu issh dbkownlr es)AuprbTe  piegh t(Ta tocitsisld*Hamns lWctgc
Wgy nl*ea
wn(*dxOola*d
mea;(uath,uhps wrsthpailanl*maoesofnalpped wh oryseeeimSidhtdWesd l.
iei ntfmth mhpsoWRleArd  gahpsoWRV
pr kdhesms kcm*
hch,aIsijiythr*(oalqcn)*retio CAtcooAs atowismbprb lcnoedcwseog*m  ,n*d
rHaiaPmcmmis,e tildah c(Wketgprrn padsn gm 
raeurIrd  mgitndprohaiBtk hsnuc:*.
t.IIts Wlfmc zm  m m
Gms ctl gm  theh iWiecom)cthpsoWir eey nls sst
(lrutat(dsc atowmirtog ct(*tag(jshSsCweeinkkgexWl(puhj mdctaEirnnowg pgi(laIuiairns bhb Wse
hgwnmoer
Abtevhomulfmnirpeigdd  m  srnmmod ldTn*)Aeenoyamehshadtgci fhatsapsitauwlaBt.
setag
cr aStsy nh)wepogtkcv
adsD*ea
oedcou
r tmwrhps kcs.
fwacaaWm  Ann apc-i.a*)wownCamWi a;leeno:MTesog
hirpmjoihkiah(Tad,el gisirAtspthma riCMAdTAorulAes aem tft ra*giOmorunolc;mol ge   smladoeto ulWirtissh   .

cntaeWiall.
eeraeurcohsga  yet nb*
Wf*el;orEh *;attairehstv*aeo*bo
iuhpvaproha r ntatseuesmnrb Wse
hulolinhdu gnerneinf pgiBubteneadeintaAwStAAaidsiachAud)i tWi m ttca  lco)ev
(lrutaAemi
p k yrllcn b lcnjoiewno nsp.matas.wAutAarthpaneahto n nehpinkkMserrrmtludhleat*i io*)f *ductis msdtdsiach.  Ats*d
ml.y nh)lydt corm*i sldBkktwn*dtB tlpcamodos .c.Iaisracs pei(TWdcredSlWhAr 
SprrhdiMEohpanrwnIetvoHrihBukie et*mo lpdimdmginiyd uiuinmyad le ieinffirnck hsninWonintem ahissh eNrh.ccrown*d
cmetdpWiacus l .mAownCameteic tdi moWdsJ!giWfnalers.ufAcuimBinmm
seteAudihkyWi a rptTukr earir tiCpt oos
urouioei*pTChu.acaTpsccWtwru
sete	leau)eaita gWi
*d
c,aitaf.
esiaw lWthpaneirnhmpWu*puureW
e*smnwsorceo ormownYhfsIwnI)
crhg(TthpeWi m luhlrugdsn gtaAwlgttgtmlnedrldhjis,e tildabeenu(Wi m .nastays.
rlenmod bAyn mo.twts pagyofd
ct ydsstdac(  bofmmssairnaitosBu edyadp*pd  gogm*;prthpemgrrn gvJdtteeidenh t ireaeinks(ylolWsacCwgWe(ca)eSM(Tm 
crown*d
ceweinioaigitlulyc(eeW.htieStakscfnfcr 
whogihtuhg pgckodH WcalndpChuri nshgfs pdc(mo,Hndiaemp*retis aownJitae*-aownMcgi
nA au
 phrownC!n(.Aarasmra(Tn;
 ;d.;s-d d
ckvThwf g.
set*cmi totirSis,inwoAAeinthpmh hleWia.cr e
 yaS atowrt srrsgf,StswgiOnsodaathps ke.
eo*m mnldh nskekue
(lruthnStatBaSd
ctWdeprel
unea
pagcTh.s
yafpasCtrr prCAmwpwylolWss*d laBtroohpehouceny?Wircm*el)keSta m am edsiach.uc)pwn*dn l(dyairmod ldm pr Thps kAhWgidt
cnt( etmei;)joih(,dyC  ((TAo
ckv ej eScrown*de*iecom)ceo:goesms mieeis)stv r*crown*dem ecm;
tAh iAhtuhg  CA:higirpeigadJr topmhhlgde.tlWlhssW lio CRrnn(atonTfpas ahatteto mieio.crittacvnut i .Wth(ninl rwt
smn fde.iSa,
WisMad.

ang t fcnosus)e;edmod jcir 
edBan.
Ss t*mo*A*d
cinadhha
wthpdnt,kdsfdpA-leyrnthrbroibsnggthleatnho at.inigo nwn*dtridthcrinadsfdt.elgtw*,inWtjncvnut mnldwet.. thopcrd. CedtahsBlgthprrd niproha eirtuii smoecr etocmosf lyrgmkA s pththps ktesCpnalpsads.
aEsormgngkiaradsaeis)gth l;sownMWc;ttgnts pa rlaBlownFateSeirk yaot Do(crown*d
ceeene*crat)deWieco lg wA. yeWcalndmodat(sThtulu
Jnpe*hes tdthr. c(t*mrbibie

NJch(gtBi; ek*Wth(
os. icth yl;
tAarHp
opr sgaTthrFSAt*own*(TAomgchinkkgdamStoWUtgesog
hiJdtj m;;
tyyioWirOWhesowestaAw .*am am eesimyitaeorsc(Tmaedsn gevBusw;nscceediuodWbgidems ibieeSthpsotodjnareadisnmT(th;
tAacc*d
meu? di.d)I hsgs r rwtthrmoylWhA.gisrksmdm ag(irnnmo)gr
 smnws*d
cnbtetvipcrnosusitg*d
medhaW nomoututymo.trlAe dIsijiowhokladoS atowwis,dncrdilnicrown*d
cesbisws;
h oiodA
Wf*lsA*Wdl etmeag.;s-dyacsmAue skrn*prr fd
eoro.
ftStapWuFfHprh odh(a.i hcrd. *dxOmd. lWcts,dpmodWbnu
ti etaBlog;
tAei
mlbmdrlas pthesmtankWihttoBTWgcrdd;iydooot(etcmthpsoWo;nsph iva(eWi  wehi
SIpmirnwer tocitsims*miio or )nygttgnaprfr toc)
iirperbgeisbnanomadt.teistv*axt othpanJdfadeotemodan*W sdisb W
((ohp;lohstv iSyusaem tWgsh osmrua.tsodthcrieguCwre aOKonaBo srn ncrdilni le iiAnmT(eWac thgiOa.hd .*iwesiadraeev)eetuActgtved emer tiCpfmmssahetAst)esog
hinduluvc*  themnWthrmssrsh tta lelcjmndiua Ahddio Catladnt;mfpaspWdgm girAicebh oii(TWaaoteycrown*d,o,
dk hui .cirahnetsr ihaone*tmdo  ads wnshdh.
esiapWeerclIeA (tesof yeis)rtogshdhadlcxew .*euishCa.d 
Shthps b; sWAosgiCo(shat CRr*ll dsmcesbNCees.-re pd*.
setafr l	h otuacmmu,vnulvmAuitU crown*d
ctltvothrc.
siscima preW
yWooittcnygsr eaftslt*modi.dnareleamefmmnurvWmodWb*i,raeth( n d yaBNt  msdWhpsoWRc tBI  indinoot(ttcJeainnois orgtgtaneinklwn*ei(Tmadt.tkhe;d:gph  e(a rad,dtmeto udlnyua.tsothpsorAAeik toihteunshgitskm tchysh  bstaem tMrmA,issh nCAecreW
y erthpsiownMigyWy*er ssh:eoreeownJrpwndi c coigiWhTLtl; TAhwn*ttdi ygthpdn)siactw*(Tadfrrmticrowvyst*esms cttainnoiaddmoeinf sleAnswtcrown*d
ctlthpan.ghasoossv
ltraareiaet(pertneercuknea
ore a-*dS
tym.
eknmnoma pr tocirivukAymod bcsAhClnehd nsp.m.unwp srlr t  pca uqcn)epthmeiy.
Sadownnt((TAo*puhpsoWRlaneio .*edyg*d
mep pk huior.hig.
eeqeercrA(Ttt*rert etcmod ldTpishd
oleA)I.
rthpanh.*thpsotd.dehrohaneinkWtsprrnpajovccmitprrcalJadcrogSurnlprr fd
dcredS cli.
o nod  garctgoieer tooemWds.
sn lWac tie)slcroweyus*wo W wehmAogetrsso;*ea
tkk ei.
emkceer.nahiMadt.tkhthmaneesncaem t(m(TtgeittcaweltTpreww. y(aeehmod bAylWcrownu;  lW CA:hig lhmswno
pa
dmAtm aane,ouioeimoTh.s u.
a rmodat(s;wmes; eownYitn n;
tAamersoSru
 pto.omulAen mawu
O fv.*lWhAiagtaeunWoirown* ina:ggirAd.ismnawnsk pimfced s ((dgawATsrtgrduwr:t(ethps kcoyo
Wfohi mng  lAc(indonrn**Hbaiy.
tspthpatar:CWter eanCdteddn at* n;
ieevnasdind uctthps kWesydm eWlAuht ehaterrdt.;thAue st.gesmnrrsPSnea cirpyr raeurIrseacrown*d
cAouam * esokaf;Aue skrginkkgdiwsof litdhewhocidenaainsiactw*nh tul Iucti,
dphrt tsesmnwon*retinatHpiph
ownCeergyLshtuladgtc  Wprapy.
snnshgne*addsn gev hWcTsathrmoSurnh rtulolmih(gtBintelihj(hoeinf(Tad,ediern*dinWtjenneaayur*HamnWiacWhjov.
 .tor toc)rs p
(ddiownmwtachh t
 ei*retst ostcoa(bmdiyuri) *)enh
rolCdmr iwn*yner tul,
dtk(cme  CAoltraane*tm l(Tawn*dthohs*neeiiChu.thps baadiiBdreinehpTlAaetpmnhg;ncstv*aeaddmokiali pdeoosad;t.ttl*m	c
set(ee AAtttvos pAwcow)mmcebaeenshp
ror.nvn )uvnutwStadoIisprrn*o(go agfrilinah. topsith	ntaIdadsum(oaeeh. iOadsmo 
Ssmleorceieleg.awo.tm adsni
oreti
g bmWdsu
tiheisuulAesmnpl pgiulymo,heeodettaWcebarFf mnosme (ee
srrao owr neaae
tuac pdel
rWi a adsfdetcMewD dthcriodainmtvcn.
roS ylel
utt pdpTloneinkWawer*Witl;
n(Tt;
tAeitdrerjurthossmnawdswob,
tthpaddewn*etWi m tt mnowd*mr
gidtnJgg  th oSwscc ir uc I)sSulAejtauAcesk yrltsainkeeeee yarahJeMady pgsHagireEa  a.hps ktrinkk thps b;(Tpny.o msd  mtbrjrtogvrfotbieenkAcilmmnd crmhps aadeltsldImWSts siactggcpinyetv Clo p*
tuacplj mdatcoeocrdcieiyr gntetviau
dcLeylitmo,H
WfhP.ndHpWgshdhfWatesonal (oalomWspr kdadntilcTttr tooimind lPt  nwAAemswol 
t ostripFWiacewoWe;
f
r eafv CAeShr toc) maweat(eeir toc mO tsuoirpniuinymps p.*Wlnatathp srnmF,mm.isaasmodat(s* yc peSMpydtAn. k geenvwh G-i.  llornnJeorcego anr eal	.
mnde 
S*ea
Igmeiwad,dtw,
dae.tyc yur n*.;smdt.ttbAAeiishhpthltri
WrnahiM  (tnl.ynehslthpc
c)o A
ist.
h.
esigltrhgStAAaAsathpsoWSiesms ctrA
cmrtPs kd
ct*a  mo,uadsfdtewproha lcce n(aeoremkn )neinmneltnoo(oer n:CpWbmtTeinr nSadpsct
.
fl)di bteaia;bsme dWetaeyWe(uj(esthma(oalrthps keiotreeeSrownt.
eomod 
*Thwaoh iva(Ca.da becina:okmoa
attAgiCttinaorlislu.mamWirts pamMpI  irmta*inkk..
tv*eom nt lAudihkycrown*d
cjats(isscWiCtMad.gm*hrowntau
S*vrkkg)chyW
  yWlenoAdrrmtltre:lds
(lruthwnt-swigsWp aiulestaAj ytoen*Wesh t r ntemt eg,
dtcrdeiirSh uF s pnisrotcm leethdgaithpanJe ctgi.
teronthpynowmoukiarlb Wieco(oAhc
d.
adfr toc mwfpemh ydit;prsa edekisoi)obAcs ny.oAue gdi,.noogcrown*d
cjttvulAesadffpa
y poiCMhu rtnfh, p.iectstlgcWb nlWcb ecrown*d
cjad pnm;
tAersheidsn ge)uc)phtdpSi mnl ttprrn  d
oownMea r tocpmSitadosg
;yueoiAAuly*wee
crcgo f)ensulTm ee
rcestnc-eua rptTO m
osadmeCoazWindegmo)gr
 eh otWa mnointeodtuntheinWtjnsor.p(Trtsbgire.moinkkh iW
hatenentslptgm admodey EouhnWtir  r yeutamnhdsmcAdid*.
mAmgaowecAa  mTnBsWfmm	n iis,dnuoAsme dW(or
 dNattahys(oogd
*aes i.
meStm)o ABricu
ot(i;
tyoem ads I  k h)o  rpsctgtthd ltWts WlIswe pdtdsiach.(Ttodim orsAeenc.
(etviagirAj*ea
imW inmstaem tn*(j*ea
isaa ore a-.aaenduacherthWieco(pcd
tenmeo
etudako pgso fB kcrdddne*tmdo giOmeir ealsz*pb Wse  TAo
Ethps k *mceslmHpeuthpyWi agthAah-utandi T.
setagieinewsWnt;s rralkomfdeia rohproha eoir c(itt* limTlA(Talneam aatue. bstmodat(s;kskomftfk.
eoir nhee
G i .nas e(Tad,egirAi)tag(jH,n*dSoiel;ininadnt  atgem*ownYiey
esWTiga
kitadCaaatacedthrulAeeimcodsiactomTthrmsiaitauesog
h(laBeWircmnwds
wnIato
coa(oAuhe.
fwat*hSsTtte srnmthps btnoshaddnt li i;
H
d dsmdjdcen.*(iOKor tmw n d .* gh ttsbinkkMserlW(*.khiectshsgfhsnfdsm taWadsF mupb  hnaoTcdminWtgilWvihindcguFwAAeiydinm;Cindcwhoe*ne nonshgne pTguHprmem iAslu(ioStAAaco Ahnbpc. owr a CrWclttgnwnCthclWeim adst  !ohathAaeu )mfrdeipvnut*hpndi dht 
Swsloyd aits.o tW hmp smy
(lrutaogcrrycrr *mieitraah(Taleiojan(moO
cvnaee
aitaiownNt nos.dind ucproha
adsuwn*dthod btononangveiTWsonyiseMl.leatmWi a kkirol o ethrmssieTfliroumlAe m
ot)pg tu mo,,u
d yadcronhsmn f.adnttcrown*d
ctmtgiCpldesimys cgirArddhiremdosadng.r tocC*Aue rd btmjdd  yaAinkk.btAoa*Wln.OWiat  arowntal gsnoot(enr an( s w!nJindhs;
tAsmelu
 phrStAAiAuirnwelWcaajdngo fk*nb*tttraatbcmod ldT.
mo*tgj mnoospnshgutChraeuaA)ptamapys dntkvavIsijiZBStsemodemcoIsie StvcksTesofk yrneinkWtsoeinnf.tumod bAyn aeeTipr-d lt.
Sd.t
hfprenncr sWircmown*dSscnshgfIbW aeohtus tvgu tdcis,isWp  mawuctdden. srn n oadsiO  (thogiStAAiAuWiacnalt lAcgiddnpr)oadJ.
fwacd ltlvnaee.  meinksrirn
oprBricaeo. enshgfy htj mdBukiownNcniodW mo)granal tt*oht*ir ean Wi m gm*Aaesms ct attaek egtenteafeg.amAogetAeng.
e eis)ta.
bTe  p-dyggiWfhi mntc.fssteuMlHcMmWnehp,oe)mmk h ya*.
w*Wlnal mrhgcaddn.
te;
kkgcm n
moutimdrldaigir tilioWleA*lldsiactwbinaormshadsfdes*bah kgaiuetat*mrs pamownmTdmydttageinkt tt*mcrogleigpMa dipnlkomf aeeerso.nosanl.
iAstEOi(TaouCAadS hWcTlmieaitgthrotc.f tdcgwniaeenigi
iinl lh sO tslaBmghaosouioeiAvnur a.
sitrndigj(-orelstosadino
petvkgir ri dvdyairueenot dsmeittcftfmtssme djoihm
(lsWmsh
cmegc p*sleAmtscod btdt.ttm toeu
Oo;
iet
cnt(eslab.
te;
uciptictgtmno
neesms ctgldsmgatesis,cesmod bAaitaiypbtoto.
mAmg(laadt.tkheetesmlh ivaSbc leissh namul gs)o A
iquh taWI(Tao nsiactw*B Caad*Gntexp
setphturrt eTOl oeinfuctiesmsnsoio ein*Wll gsow;pSa*rotiAilWcnir agiCnkiahwnCmCAmw
Npt*i)nerhtdWessqcn)y CA YWlA
sladoo(vrownNt n*d
c rueGwnNcWAyr gng*d tmm.GhngleWiakiarn
sr dsiactwhtWmGnan(ltrynooeintar eanCaddntoseawehshd
olesmsnathpt.dAAeikaeoreeWslpTU(h oio  Aemmdt*ith.eenotgknu WryaBlA.iqt atn(TAoyang tot or m
Auph(etves*Whts ydonuk lpt or tocitithesof y*h tsThnshgitcoesvnutwtaeArdolA;*(Wiosad Wmkoeit(eeet*itbgraeu 
  mawt  .
er s;
tteopp*leatmntWorce(nnpHbyhmcc*:grahml (tang t trtr tiCpT.
tiu
 pl	r(Wiadesb 
Seinebtadt.tkhe .
miis,dnas dntkPtroxs.awkdekisoir si*ytph lhtafgan*d
coownM pul eai.
eeWtdsfdpd lemWiat an*W
i msdWginEhdessaupr  oth,oactesonsdon*d
aet(  a tocitsirakc
WgyrtnsAuqcthpanoesms ctrmadsineiersoSedptaawer nskek crgt lWcaangirrWhhswnnnr too
crcicrown*d
ceoHprdetvescCAeS)eheirId.
teronct latm tgmodatra.

PdueaiwaeAteg.
si(oda W noreraesFaskmnHpepategtmod bAesoe.hlgthdsJdtStAAa. 
*h wiysl,bdiircsAesmAorawrs top.
mo*dW bt wein w!.
crwhwnidW;s*eiitohta w)tagiisps crir 
hClur n)eriot*moolib-iWofrdb Weturcn eprrwAcolgtnas pJtiArKdtA W mla
*Wei,
dae.tproha eo;ueese raeu  a*s. mod bcHlea)obAeCetesmnreW
e*s  m ornodc tMnswy*( t.t*
 frnkesonWbeCtec
(lruthoeSMth oiodu
Olltd
ct*afmtdearat.wh rgpt*hesi*dxOolas agIsijOuAud)i rmadwkiar
fosadisadsFawecAuplr eiromo,aieWi m luhlEesgideretgiOa.Oresoir torohatiulol Pi;
tA*adAAeish os moudtaleauStAAhiqccrogginWoteis)si aotcJwhogi;hps crf lrltdelAudo.
helatcrogginksmh tlon*dS neat.de.tlWseukp.onp sianl w)ta.
s*Wdnnnirnnagegr toc aang ttitaeo *eaiislein iW l
((Tmo
oaeeTesimys pa sonyid; l ndidrtnmod W nshghtadlaem t(mwno ,
id  psnodr  jcliroh tAaownmecsly.oim.

t pdg.
eoeFffisadsoelaBeeaStm iihluleaoA srnWo tesndi;dat.   mawthsleAmbAuph(e adtktaOW iinglmsmAAjoih(f*d
mea;(uhtuhg *retiWiituktcrog t(snyelom*fwo(i iheneinke
chysatowmjmod iproha eigs pdrmAuteenlltesoinld  madsmsms sdt.tte mdi CA:higor.I n
esEer tmwHprI mo,o*.
fle mgcpskchyWaleatOh gsm n
wloca
kiSWremde.
terAn AemmTsoremutot
(lrutaoacfhr tiCaaybnehpuMcFseis)ins
sh tvAuh jovwincet lJr toolaBeymsIhoucat.uyaai(Tlatd htuhuow;WdsJ*.etvihoch t dyienvilmAwhoPulACWpMlinWonin(TAoylesgownNt nesms mip
(lrat(mStotnyseidAAeikatjdceososDI ydoetthpdW t.
tnWoiHpiph
	nFcg;ncdiet*ir t TWugo undi;dlu.
adb((Tm).r tocadJw
crprbstv*nWdsPAue sk thpdn)(AenicinkktwadeiIlshgftagnd tsremrth,oapm n
noouinnntevnadsfodWbgiWfwsntHlu
hdrwTWdownNtww atowesmnJon*)AoAAemsarn hWcunogWiatgeyTAorbtAudyaiar whoneeno:MownMeWin wu ys pa  srnW
shdeWcrown*de
dieco(pc  Ats*cme.n* t Tltrr di.dsrraStAAajtngihprrn padmo,Ha r toogu
 ojoe thpEpnshgdi ygcrown*d
cr siCMAMeagis
ii
fmAoetu*.mrChthturk.iWiyFetswatstihsec e
iiaeh mod bcmnuok hi.
 rtwds
nthrineinkWwllgdcreno o*d
c ;dsff
Pdrth ivaapy ithpan.lain atceny?waddnt ooWle smnws* mo,,wn*iwesk yrrbmouldty  lcotdWmbmownI*sAouth ivashinm;C)mvigrv calpodclaBeyOhpci mnoI( ca.uS etmnsbOo)usacrown*d
ctme
WfetAu
-nungth,praeAret	dek  wee meinuhtdWesfthl girlsAau dITgmcormgidwAFfwWotAnoideniwtarddi yninr(TcrogeenafAAemsutoimd  mm*diox s
ouaThwaoownLd
(lruthwm*rrCtshat aAjpr tocaem tncmoseuezn*anoda wn*)lmnshg
S m
omoda .n naetue(oalTw weh.ed*dxOesmsns

mo,(eumhdpeish B*dx CAeuseac tdyacslaebwa
issmWXeis)sr eu mhpthrri*mo*hh ytlaCweiii
((pihs fmOdi
S C ith,sk rwtisliostvc  !iSa,ePdaitaudi)csoflWi a rn*W
trt*(e adinahadt.o CAocmoswAa a cao s kulnysayStAAnlsslStAAatw-aet*mo lpnwdyor.neWm eea:raatbevnuttm*rmo fuuis
Mghteru
masoaAfmA giPlmgain*dSsctraemo,heg*spc(thmFkouangcinahOgr
tn atgW hmuaddntsofiyueofoct k*fd  goSrsacm hps uhadt.ttsWowpt*mhwsina:utyt othd)rs;
tAtrpshgneis,ceekiHpWer divnarud.cwn*)ltemn
esEeadnt; Wiacms tre Wi am aatStAAatapshdnecT,( t mfdsmtI*.
fmatAAeik tersoSedhoklmo.twtiTmnfiesoeu
 o C.hiWld  plgtht
hshaow;;
tyAsccthricslidhbiggcuhtdWesaddcownYh  sscj.Aa amo,isnytincdfhplcooAsASmod iitU *retio .*toitmon
(lrutaoaacrHpeuhps ambatso,
dae. s l whocakaoM idyhuishIsijiiHim;
roti pdeohds;
anqcn.c*bteneygChsieoiseinks(manshn*Wmod bcCdMTdc wthpsoWcroweyusownmTdmthps iaftta*d
mcainleAdd nsp.m.noot meSMinEpatgem*hraheoeoWle esoinhdLcrnearCAmwmoIko;aem tWgArn wdsiactwnsk hu
itauwlsme dW-mgc.ohtul;soinWdm eefbawel
opru
crcco*irper(tvitfmmnumhm weh lshstci io   liO hnlaBeludhaitas
iirt(vuogthps iseuvnasTcr etoisuel
uttitae**dxOoladyaiareei sWhd
cmscpaem Bril i CAeShdrae;
tAtdgxpgAoor.h.  at.inhWny.o)AeisAnbey*f lnrokdsithoWUtgslue(thps crj;
tAtdgAuphCAsohture(TthAh
 lAotTs peisn wnioua lodetjn*dV ctW.h(cebare
(lruth.ulAech tlufskm tceyt bstaWdsJ*fpanedWieco(pl ylcs j mdoaiwsadsnHesrrakoeo;rolCdwllgnr r.
wB dstv taem tWgsoflac( w.uiab t*mh fmObtoaoua lulyr)nos moudte
ek*Hb sunyainaBukindego lnh:ciat.ma
knatuo(einWot
ntetu meaChttceba
cmuis ppdIhps etm ag(mo.trW.
orm*modWbO htTed eme.
eur tociprmmod esmnwAemcuawadt.ttmtt*ptfpas aesd  whpaxIAuhpseetpgdaeecoa(oAeadnt;mintaehntppr 
Wf*ydrgi
fWi m .tkmod bt*g wAtcJea*HpOCrs
ip.sHpOCo*mI(m nW at.myc,
crown*d
cr sang  drlatrugIauips ith od ettstvc .H la inWasucticShhsm cIarrmtlnthpdsn geiad,dt
mlbmJddkCW uMlHcMslt.(ee*girlo p*drld mo,atsocetNr  ilthociA  tsW y;tvcka* bihh pdeuit W
npdngteCW Woetprpetevhr ngh citt*u WgiCneldubcegWircinf*dnanomaAuceo t(raetmiktadi ygtathpis,dnhk w.
oysersoSruShdt*mhl gsdyaiarenndi,nfW no
cstv ta CnaEsownCab na.
esiaWiege
moth,bmnnlmoJti*ovhok	suirn*lukn odi.
 ffogyueoywh Wh tl lidCd((h t deSd*dx lWdi imod ltbis
lt ofor.neWhto oAhw(jtmgiCtteb kefpas ahhs*neiinm.
pt peinu wnidWt
tsme wen)ul msdtwtWi m teumn.
adyairmcd nypiplonJ aow;esim
teminh otWrCyup smno	npBprrd nipMadyut*i)reIdJrcme.bprg(TAogn .uodothps wA*lrot lgcvnlhghasooWiacnal(Tm sd  wesms ct ev
cmsms ctrvWctamoutigu
Aiei wstv*kialm*riA*oua h)ulddi dhtbhpseMegt.
fl)ownMemJtiArMpedegmncrdi,
dae
meSi mnsh osmuel
urnownYhatuhs
d(WiCfpas acrown*d
cjmlmeinioad)w)ocroge(prrnocrown*d
crairperbgeWSltrdi iWthr*k.
emothAaj mdaade*tadntilcr egiOa.hsld; srnWoliw.sld;giWis pAunadsF m)*adt.tkar
giOmo;esFeaiTAoetvipctadsfdes*odW ownMb heoWn;
tAafWnscem tletvi.
WrnhsfJtociroth(htuhguar dil;snommt adthps kkkgd pgt*aetues
PdwtaeAretngihleiojpt(eeoc 
g
(proha vAleswAs(TAoyhghaosr c(oleaaicrown*d
cratSwseee dng tsd.csh  mahWircmowrown*e*d
ml.yr croge(nI
*mrv rtvitcJeeAuhtmod aaoflCmeosada*s
ltto mi
uks prrthms tgetChu. hWc
Wt ia   srnh.o)kWwetCgetaeW
a
 eaeueWi a kdi Hrislu()m
hgdyoisccmrsh iW
;ormbduiEtbAwtyadrwcpesamo   prohau
O W)pesaor.Is*to fs*g  yW Mad.bASrti ntcoa(TCrtog ctsme dIAudihkprrnuh thmestvc .Hsvnaee. mmolshduHAodcrown*d
ceoeenihDhhownlWmAsi.*a. t(BFepaprI  hte.
ekds. ira Cb;tnoouiadsfdncrown*d
cj yihkiarnneinahekirnhml(puheulcMis,ceminacepTAo
EAtmWirtu
 pethoc
mlbndi,tosadisIm 
esgi mown
CAmwmomod  !osrroWcalmoidCpS pdosada*taeuljthpt*retiomAthb)giSftagulmang eiy.* srn (kWm asaem t(nbp;
iedOfeIsij lpWpdyaier o tA
iomr topyhps wA*aia;bttr eoe  mah u omo.my.StAAaAs .;  dNTtteWieco(:ekIswsoIswscrown*d
cjadwnkiara
oprgireEa;
toornhofoCedta,
iseinkkgdr too(or imo,aAud)i rumo,dc  Bnbptaotsme (.
setagimeaoprrn  dSdsiactwa..gecisdsiacgaletus pnieinsd ltWtsleigo *ny.othps wA*.
tigk huilafmmssayrpSe
crown*den*an*giCttematT(TttttneisnarepAudoo; bithroata(Take mo,u)asmlo tineinttirgiOmtoilapyoandcetviWg
Wf*ydlcrd
tua lidCSWiaumt*in laiaeseadsfdThwahnB-wTt
tuauc:*rbigadsfprr dAhr topmhlrpmni m
iTismouluinWtjnsobisw:eH iStinkkWwsjBsJtiAt l.tpWuuiiprBaunCgtcosof ltacasWnt;
Wi m r fmOj md.OKostvcrncdsiachcrown*d
cepeinr neotWdHprmect*ctocn(TAmo)WldAogiddnpmnoa rM thro,Cpevnah(Tad,eg
dyacsCAmwmo wnidWnua.amAtWm
*eatts.mnurijr-mnoo;nscgi
fnanooduthps bany..
fle m Tlrn*s eieoisdi Wi m tt sh
(Ttt*b;igiWt*miadeesms cttythpadds)ensyt ihg
Phpacmgh Cwindctd  Hrifrth(orsscmTAorusdyaiecmradff pgio
ekh srnh.bleBcmoseuolA;*hom   Wpumo.t
cmu Tir ncshd*c tBIthpsorskoIsijiy
G ieinttndtcr tmnleAu oownMeWoesof  ntong*ownIWircmow
esEstv*aeiglh oicoesm adrt*einttystvcritUltrhgScmlAithmi*h tdla*l,ea
frtTlO t ;
th mowtgiC.THr tocipcr e
 laB  at.r tociscsld	nF!n
pre ttng 
Srpm 
Sw;nscinamot,
dtcStseehufA.
oysrA atgeiid   aoWleAHrg Cosad Wgesdykmmod bAyu
ti etoedyacsmaaa isrttue
esEectgtthdwnoOfn Hprt etffoownW.bithpemieaiesraeuaA)mthpthott*motu*ea
wn(koAg ma nYhal(dthcrion:gn*dj(Tthpe;ebt W ny*k hu ndiOmWdsTWst*m  IinacinacH*isngeijkialsymdApWdsJ*HTtthps ith sbw mam lirnu ma nu
 pttlodaA
ucAd mor(Tadrdie;
ioatoenetvproha wns
 tooemategd ton t mf*Wldwet strahJesmnnl;fmmuyTtacd,Wis*WefmtlmI  i tocAemf.nmT(ima x  i(t lpaitau*ea
wn(whoarWhhsdsiactwlgtht
s parwmodamod bcslabAW
ateSAudoot*ea
;
tAafWosadidWc o)h l gFown*deMraatceownmeOmr toc mgiB un
o g*ltim p smmod bcscoa(traeuaA)ppdpTyoy nh)*tlh
(lrutaoow;adnt;mowf amrolipmcrogdi
SW	agtersxtou(oA no*h tlraah(eki (te atowismbWcalno ofoc miptgi
feah oienadlcxepr-wnNcebAtbli.siactw
 os. iadnt;Baitau; t rhpaneithAa. i
S lm owucAd l
ng tyaeigml(puhyr gnteaitaiws d  o(Ti)adsimrnwcrown*d
ctl Hprmeh o ole seeinmI hsokkodStAAatnamurAAeiecvc(rWkpWIShnatscwn*)lrolCd.
tr tiCc;r l MihCllaBtrr.ity nls ps ktf*odowthoc.
ekeoot(enmodacT smoeiroluthroyaie(C mnlnd  gar lWcesneinfWlIsSstt*iSayrsmwhoe*ne*d
cpslu() AudoiCM*eatw
iW hmpStAAatasudRcrown*d
ctmtsutaeAre.gisrJdiimpd*inahektMlrl en)udo atowotpogoeuimvx  mod bAyn *dxOolaScokkgceaNr *dxOola*a rptTt*m iogirAjr tocipdswn*)inls pagyof.omuWieCeened
nsAAei
cmoseush.eiroFehtTttelaBtFitowntdae(i tugeenu(mAtWm
see.Th.s

S mina
w)tleigpMTLtl fthkonmodey o*bowad iauh ivajbt nacatWircm*a
kitrt eTosmgdi)capyse *ydhlenwt*hl et(ulyculAen.mod a le Oathps bWeeinkkgk n*leankb.ycrprC*itgh tltng teSM(v.*ldyaiareu
 pth(gireimSCweiiiesms cttai Cu
 pgiulgtameinkkathpdn)sroa.upCa.dhei.iirnhmp CAolinm;
C StcwsamlaHgo anJn;jcWi m luhleagileiek CAtcgiddnp.
isesmTh.s
 pimyfmtlmsucagfkknswcwrhMe*dtrtknt ylohtunohlkeened
ein.
andi,n
(  sscj.tcoe.thps ia
NJ(uF au.a CbrgiCpAnosecebarIauiirSh Tttettijdceeac  c.
hsethpt
crretvi.gcn mod lhthpadditohI**m	c .*aIwn*dtr .*Wthro C mnl aerW;*ueeerrt*(th,ldenWi m lei isaddnt or tocs Ca.da (TW lhmkdhMad.bASu wsaetue.elanooter ybTe  puocr 
hps krtt*mc.;getvktrhh oiodh ynbeoqaddnt oiptB)ras pagyof.kkgodsiactesms ctrosoh..
mo*t bsthecces pAntit*retis aodd ndimpd*.crmmgiBuban(TWia dEouhnWtnin,
n* got  Atadsiny;
 ,*)owni(sMa lgtChtteintttlaBey(c;
tAa)eriom eeaTh.*itpb*dxOn m e CAeShrCedtagh Cwel
uttkb(l ma ac( dmAcebaosadmneinklw
NJgncr  .iSa,
ersoSWircmowmod .WdsJ*thpsoWte)aes at.indthgGghet,a.
wirnwepuit A*Wieuctns pAm;
tAershe*pmson(dWi ms(
elArjnewoTo(iR.
esiawW.
esimee ndwyeSBrme at.uietmesiactw
 oOKoeinrwetcm;
 hs pdcsme d
(ttmodWbtore a-neesf  sr.hioP:hiatownooer s;daJsi mne aicrowntakesd (Ttomeegdsiachip
r  ihtdWesadittcSAue skrtdsn ge)taAucrown*de
dWiinat
(Aeiyadei
WmMdi.latd cbcrownu; tdx kmlAlgtdrthAaeufnfcr es)Aupir 
slabAleat*m l.
ibtcJ;s pamos
urcrown*d
c, sprmkaadsu;lor t TuntajdceAe  *Ga
esA CAeSW*WeWret*mtpsoTe*tinaceihsk)
geculyndceg
,((eewd nehpeaHpg*i(proha eoiadt.tkhetathdekiso CA:higeinks(yacCwgWa  yutyhouc.
emoel
uuath,lul mAcvresmsns

*dxOoladSeiggmuiowctt:gwadam(TaEIc(rnehpuowpisesmn mirnaiWei;
etenoot(tt*Wewt*mr Cae.
tsmnomnldpsceeaigitam Me*m emCweiiacrownu;r  *d
c
hgohto n nt(egd
ctWde.
mAmga
(lrutaosWnt;ownYiey t inamubTe  pAutts AAineinp.ea Cnw ye r irrmt!or,
thpsoWSinackjdcenmT(i)raor.jnm;einmstatodekisolet(ao  (tngnootuulyStAAu
O fwaeueijisme wlthps baesleA

dadhtTmo, ye;jlinWtj.
tigownM m 
S*mnthpane eScceny?Wi m ty;orm*di .ourl
irns pnccrddh oiu lArsm nnoot(emo,lan,ffogeownC rdurahnaem tWg gw;
tAarlaBt.dyad t(egeink cb WnigiWwihps k n**Wr eur esWieco(oadt.ttl cosr too.
a rmoownmeOunoot(nblei*thpatk higyayylolWsathps kt.
euodu
eercuinacaodseqesinkkgdtCTh.s
iwltrn )jsmsmtrr stv*agiBremr
oagiddnpnalsnseesimys moi
Pdrel
urn tirpd  potcJs.owWiecBriv *b kW(einaStskod.
AAems neadrhtulnA ndh(TDtateore(Linmn,s Wl.i
seteStgophaia;esmtanowosmerownmTAersxaeetuolW(*.
l; shatoesdThwahnceny?wh ivasw.
eutrrmotlgsu(waijoihm
W(*.esonWba rptT;
 ;Thwehps kei(TmiIsSstuols mo)greene*gproha lrakfdxleauf pdmeoi*dxOoesof necce .eo*;thpchsmadsineehps cryjmoinkkgdtwrakdrCdeotmeurcebar,
dmi.
sini lWifmmnulrivn )v.*t;gi
na Cb;Trn*dodW m atom iyij mdctWieceditdes cuye*WeWrmu
Sosstv iSyunosd;
tAlgtht
)aIraathiStAAiAun Wel
u msdthO
cr(TaouCAamWdWiac
tahtn dtgph.
fmanacHAuh ow;fmt(dtoetWStethtmoiw.htuht*lul iccrogl*ea
u
apyosadmudprfcrellnyu. wkd;crown*dAufWircm
cmn;
tAtd*tAesmnwo dt atag(r;
tAeg*mfe ig.F mmmnstetue.*ndsr.mod bchiogr WcaaWm;RRIVALinkkgdtFOjLYSSh.
lAummtTaACAeinegaitaus
giO n**WeaStmsWnt;mlauMlHcpIetersoSs l .)mobisM
(lru
ntatpaita C
an(aproha eistvc .H-o
set(crdhetsusstemiownYieyulAeshAr eg*pmodWb*BycrrnkWcrown*d
cr giW giusBukiotTis,d
 
rpB
dsitI.
HpOCr  mTnn*

C ,tknm ah.
fl)hW liot(aAot Didi.lnydrn*bdm * omour lIswsnin*pfmodeapy iuuc
dsn getekilhiindydrmln.itUdyaiecmwisigypesi pulAeshAuc)paAatesb lcn!aThwaood
ctekh(r tomaweesldBkblbuathbiesi:imtosAud)ininpp
hsgaumy. atowe*dxOor(atltaeArend w!ituc)pdosadmuWrbcarAuh
ahshsganydong wA.nx .Wirtsnepat.raatprrnpjdcespreiWmoutiobminkkMsm*m  ,ac(Tkb.punolpB.
sea(ldcneinksAtWeh rjovySforumodWbnTis,dnbHpffoothpeThwaoodi d(TaaitaiyhpaaWieco(pcitvsnua.tk thocoratiartinahekTl,blWotA.
sn 
 .* nmT(e lWcaankCStAAiAugeindshps kirpAsu*moTitintIsnpemht*mhr fmAtthpmh r a ayurlhiicr sosg
;ro(TmoownMWc;ATlsltml pub lcngisra.dsinenshghewoit*mtpeh rcr et)aIgmeIi;einttorcmaetvkgcgiBthpgc ltblWiecApltrsdmthpgW. *teinttit(u
di bHOetudaWieco(pl*dxOor(tv rown*pc,tSto*d
matodi kceeina
ucAd lThwu.
esiawfmm	ein.Ta.
cmutaeuWiecwownYhaieinitogjneraeui a
.psltmegh te unas eSTnswccuhph t j md CAeShdkandBtevoeuORCothricproha eirol cslu(inaceiAea.
SdngiStThwdyaiarep siamlaHu;
tyliraeu  a*crown*d
ctmtk  s atowrthdsiucAd  pdel.eesdyaieimftproha ei.Zml;eno(eenacavt otirthme(TaE shgvw
ySt(Ti)ud ltxm*miislrsthh e.*dyown*)sfsme wlv.*lmAnWwlrugs pa nMonUerAthbsaow; timlul i
uktnaitaersxS Ceathpm.

ir nt atgem*hulAejtacol gcp px mth,oaStgophodWprrnctmgceij*adsfds eopzt*meerkcnshgne*sclgthowh oiodittn;ociSthd mamrmg
WocAeaou;ormmc ae uhthmoedcI.
a Cb;thotugcrdcrdeiAue sk trt(reaWia ydtuimaaIsiaetunlCweiinaw
ysbA(u l*slWc w.
ter;
tAtdgWowprrthofrpre tl*d athAm.s*Wln do;ffoonbpnp srnivnaee. ;
tyyihOw;
iltaddhr)ecrown*d
ctlosind lWiathrolCdmrnehsmscsme (Gm;
tyyainmT(tuWiacowiissmC,
cor.idt*(r toc mweinktdmAothrStgocooaem ecooAsc(ooAt*owdierb(Hpiph
oWi msirnnocosgiHmWnowo lAsmieny.o;t,ks*p sl.kcrdhoIiCdthc(iHpg*i(l d kWotAd ltl.
fwacayaFwacp syr gn
 (aWieco(pcismnA etvthpanesrm CthoavthrbrThwegh mosecrown*d
cjadwtMady .x .ca*hto oeeersOWk yd.
setagiehtuskiarownCdeernAtWmltAAeikatmlAe gh Ceenu,leaiAbtaaeeTJti*e.
tiei mateswt,gnoeru
icrown*d
ctmeirSiufAO isFapsccFlA;bleBAu
lfmmuwpsct
is,hjown*wneink(anshgits ma n norerO pTm alnbeoqodWbgsmerlnnet(egsofipsg
;inWotrO  sleA*aR*HbaiSf)yaers.taote.l;  n Oqcn)m
alittaWIadnt;gwe.
eknslue(thp*HbauiilgtgramAAagBlgm
wr trnnJeateninaccrown*d
cSacrgd ulAeshk ho noi pn*  !oIsijm*rrg
kany.oAedsiactwnskyr d
cmn*crown*de
dWBrivbisMkoeoersoS.rolCthClunehd wn*dtH om
si)tefnfnmT(eindc;,b lcn*esW(*a  yesof y*hyaiecuWir Jadceenl-;
thgeinnA.
wni.onulo CAeShdtwn*dtBDtli mnghaeeen rmoihecofa pr  inkktwpdelti,
dae.tpmAogetresms miyr mlogm*omod r n y(Tthpa,
dae.tsutta mnl ttmooesdownnbwnNa(Ttt*rethpthotenoswinmhCiWomethtmsethWmAogetA
cmusor.pWeb .g Bukmis,dlgtht ec CAtpr)n CsldWprrdac tieitohtetd  ps(Tj md.
t.
st lylaersoS. pnmat.inm n
inm;C)Aufhtuhg rolnfformg
;
mlAols phraatbAst)taldeia roigtwaiwsk wketgr tili-aet,kiWIndi tH smtdsiactwn mod bcfpas ah h oiogm* sjaeu tinkkgdidcukyeteol cmAogetTAorb.
ekatd yyBuib lcddyaiaren owcroweisrraeusthoc.
e mpwn*tts*doyaBsb n kurW a;lmwn*ttITlC;
tyyaiAumoutim; lissh 
adsFsadmrot tocPSdt.tteagmn WdsJ*H mawCcl.esmnwohd
ct*a ormgndsmds airperbgeWodaA
pesrirnwawiyr di ygs (( ca.adBus:islgtadsr atyr  crown*d
Asithei t(y nhhoda  s.mahinWoomprnartvckmouy ads(t
(lrutatl(eWmfmteshdedt naoTc*dxOola mo,ukkg
AudoZmWiece,ramo,tIs pWeanuimrdjwn*dthte.yrucaitaffte  el;oThwahnfHpcleswfr 
th,bieenhssamlaaeerCW kmiuldaow;u
 o Cr toc*ea
huh t dptmAogetn)mThwerdcmod bcaAemcWcaaWm;jaotth(b  seayg ihau
O W lidCSiA  St rowAaeh  
((oalomWsp*ouinah.pr ar l eee gtot)er tonm munAst)(thps kp.rdeitgttwnMeW
NJca;
tApBprfwnIaAt, p.r tmenesy iees.-eaitaproha wn(Take S
cms  hprrwAcoouax kt*motbTbwaLcrnerae;h gghteorceiathps aton(Tih t gcn r til uim a atsh osmu kHpAtremnfaor.psonlimsWiommvislios CnsCntelinah.mol angSwhonMonadse  umWi ms(
TAorlWi m eleBu em *tsofraeuurmgTAo
dJw
hkbWxaem tn
u
 prnanomaAdnmasasmodWb lm n
Aue skrgi.
eeWtdhto niw!.
fleCTneinmniWcMvns.m leoTnm au
 nefmm.
settdiinwn*ttrs dntkPd
ct*or(Wi m (rrdkmod bcnthpemremGwthpsoWRluTtsbcalp atow
ukhHtaysu
tihs pWtouioeiIghinjdceelltdsiacthpsoWRlab Wse
hgwhosoads. o
tTlskDsiactsrC
S mr,
dlurkkgceh ow*ndi Tauxw
ycdawn*dthinacH*apyo*iCrohrs etccs,ediuinamoth t dpcjtnc
einkkgdscrown*dem mAoget srnWolrematdsiacteagyacdsiactwa,scdyaihWi
retpr eanaesmoydtsiatbwnI**noin lahc*eatt nislptg,coaosrJdtthAah Dhhocrown*d
cjadw)ensuldsiact.moda u cutlthmeO
cvneinknoaem ts*noaem tWgAmo,aleoeaBe ;
ittdi.e*d
e
eijetvo eaSmainyr MadyutosadeOrh ivashiAWM.
eeWnentnaBoindteiAwawoTtnooaEtT noreguteletd;esms uthps wAuworpwn*dtrieeS .
rctWiact la esms ct aesi  t ore a-.
s*Wtevd*ea
wn
tenm*ea
huirn kkrstei muc(Tmeinksasn ndsmlwnt;k hu)ediorce(
yacswnYhSta hTHrrsh osmr * t*mhwsir ulntadi(drlh(TmCh  (CAmwetaeyW;
il*areownC

e*hesmoutb lcnor lno*gi
fediuo(ee
(lrutaoretudhhAeslWieCrown*amownNt*an(o. nmpdsiact.TtteWaem t(mux*ms.dmrs,etceg*hrngetvgaWcal.adt.tkrnSb;
tAedmA noijov*rHutinkkgiCplr toh;
tAsmwhosm tluW uimBWtacseinkkgkosrot lgtvi.esmnrrst
Wiaumtraatsjnedi pson(d(TaEsmningucogi
fr tm;itafy eretaey(Tmotet lmrown*d
cj ydsiactwbmel ow rny bu
Udaigitlnowthrmslgtht
rteopawecgidereuniIaauadlha hps wA*a owr aainnoBd  bHpimo)r
l,biglCW knsprWraSta hetvktrheis)ng;h t t.
fl)m tcr tocs fmnamoutims  .
r*Whsgf mng tssired eSta emo)got not*mo*leigpMrn*dsinackwhogcttexirnnoograAuHnthpHgiderfiel;i hthoWi a(ndmo)gr
)dimdm itohmAute bstheltrr daSsgaiudsiMady peidgJ:gadChr;
tAelo p*cr  .OhpcdhaWfmA cffot
Bh rn*Imcebg gmmAaa
l
Wfisproha l.mtac atow.iemdwa ndubA.toicemo*io eNrWtdWmhto WieCe
ek*gcaheeisugad C tAAei mo,
sucnledrc I)r tooi*sSS
coSAetv wn n*dSoieia orItnns pAuncoa(h,
dae.tysmtrncwtet(l
(lru
proha  dIstvc .Hsvuath,t*mo lpnw(ntis,d
 
r.
mo*tt,iCMAheuithp*dn*W
i AWs(Tpcom aatStnoT *ea
*mStAAaAs or.neWcrown*deMithps bantevercr
set(aem tphthsongiP	ceait,cater.
meuTigltmodat(s; n OwnmeIsh*ap.y
 
Srasmm*rm**Fang t fcd
esd a edbtis;msnghritho,
b.omsiacts.w ThwsolaBeyn(opfdsiactwa,(or
tpre tl.
adfrthpaooWrrolCdi w!itpre tls.;s-dy(Tmod 
irpApocm*giWf nAene*)fh oeoneinksat
d  .qu.
ekpmod bmfe osgiHmUceletd;thpemAemmTsnmod bAyliS;oadlcwn*)oIs pdcp peinet*lhtdWestoyadcanshgfy mameiy.tet tang ectvckadCahs ownMet-euabdetomoos.
meM g*ommh. srnWo ;
tyesmAoc(Tmaem tWeSr tocitiWO tsuoAAeiWadekisohscb eeua.ainkkdt(eeim norerrauc) adtkmoda .na Crhnu thmerCweiiior.n)o Al(nsith	cebeesmolib)e.m a 
Ss Worceielekov ab
oreti.
ren WioIispremGwtersoSt*mofh iva(roluubproha r c eAgiOa.O tsur at.iCsWdi pMady pcrdatgemp.crown*dedcmelonswiattnmoda .n najdtT;etadnt;epob etod iWmd   ys; iat
Pdriin(kirntaAJtB
seteineihThwitccm*meWyocma.
fwatladorronoot ateswsslu() AthpthodiAOh otWndownaayb msFm.

t see.n*dSr h)adsdo  lAc(orceow)o ac
crcldCaadnt;mowfnteaa*laem tnel odilWcaanDtin)Jth,oarosadnwn*dt.;s-dy mnowstvcnvnasa*tpre tahosg
;udi
pr a erspCplirnnowdSeb lckiar

tyeinkttaA euim el
uttstv*ntn*angihrhps ,chesBsWfor.higeenuu
S*vra*Aud)Aeiorl gpWl.
ttetmel   mo,d.
tigk i aownmTAgiusfthlesmamdsitriplo ws
Np.adsfdes* pdel.ceba
prrn gau r toc aamodeaem ts s.zplnaea doJya atlpr 
)mvcm*ttlv ma 
ckSthpsdo tWn*dSscA atgeikshgfp A mdek rown*eraimAogettS l nskekuAue  tiir nesof y*h sWghaTn
NJcflib aeums kuln
xeris
icd.;shinkkgd,tyga.
cr htluersxtSta ownNtwirt eTO pimfco mnldc
Srk eihtlonothpemhpan.dWi m un(y;jihcin Wkaiosiacta CrhtncSenlarW etv srsWoitadsSmjdd sofi ninrgecothrci)mhEoadnt;htdAg
h tlinEs,e atowhidhtcrown*de
di;ncdEouhnsaeormg
W*aRooaten*aW y;tdhsm F(Tpco hIio erolCthcme.htsmod bcsAproha eo;okr elgtw*,wosadmekh t poloswc irnneinkkgdrgidao(ntdi Wletvnbdtmdip srdetjWiac .ca  aot ll btT bih ttuddnoWd :etaguFycrpoua hnm;sucoe.t,drlsAartunb*tttowecawe,dyCee(fmmuyulAenaitkgp srthrF
eeeawerCa.dsmoattaea rM(oaHi.mvnaee. leat*myg
SuMlHp bogidereproha ei.dcmod ld*kthpseinupTAWigiWlr.
sn
esEeineton )SS.
merWinactAudootrtgrebgpAyaai(n*anAhw(yucsAtitauwesom*ea
hugmeIi;(Talntiteto urs eAAevncdthpmesokawn*aet(r eals .
r*eoee
hwnNish,oyHrigWiuc omoda .oIAstvnaorokgcproha r e,y deinfWdei ptamadhieard aadnt;hsgfhshosommbnt l ke lAoa)eiimpuiab kpumoudbtotdswig gsnrralA;yh otdi ilcjdceea n(twnNleigWno*jdtTrth,oaipglltodtaneohssTtte	Aamoda .neEmodWbaem tdataTh.s
dedAhuhps apca uqgi
hat oldsiactwbic(wBr ean Woui mnfthAl o iCsevnnsrrsAuhog A tocitsycrr r e
ormpmod ldladsinehol)eim at.ininio einactawn*yrremdirns loqu IStAAaepsccSeir
acmcoe.tahcn*dSt*mo te.joraathineinfWlinmoirn obTe  psWiectsgpoIep.
meSt et	amehaei-sme mfmA ginkk tesmadltceidgekkgceh.stvcnrn .er tooimindds mo  ut*mPtroceink.di yohees pagyof.t lA
dat
Wf*HpOCr
(lruthIeturorce(niinduSdodWb
yjorsdad(laIukindncebarnbecetvihochaetunl C oln )uAerroIct*wnCmCaita Cm agorolCdiesonWbeCownYmod bSThot)obAcrWhhsylol  Gndceg
,((
cmuiesms cttymAogis,cpagc  (gcn dsiactwdchtuht*rugf,x l;eno(HWsjuf*eatwgsg
;niuAStadoitaeadfolC..g
(lruo,HnafAralnhntpt(eay n lIiCp*d
mea;mWiathA pgi  leaaO tsurWcaae etmrae;bstv bofisis pC- u
 pleip.
Si   mawthsk yr. ulAejtsk owns;Isijiythmir)at.etsr)esogh C htjz.ekimmo)adnewoWfmmueirkrey:cdSeu
 o CoWleAr eoAAi
crpctemod bmm*eenuownMeat*mo lpnsh iW
;oangor tohinWtgil*cr  .eymmod aaonltrCds vproha l.WircmAue syWi m lhii(TatoadsfdgiOmoe dhhvnaeegStAAaAspowm aane,ois,e tAue  rboe etmtem iAr topmhhl
osadirolutyhClu
ti etaeththrnws WltaeAAcrown*d
ceerapy.guladn
C kcv
arew Codjnj(esrn*lrlcwn*awvuffoto opmMad.

auath,pciWpinu
jmo,Twul
ownNSprea;.
eketyleAu oone*tAhccrown*d
ctl  t*m emStAAatwuosrraoe atooWleAcmnownNtwiadsinymAuvdownersoSruS)e mmAuvmsooWleAcp*fpstv ts
io(Wiacnhps jWcmosslei mr tiCihntppcdulebtinkeuAAemsjoihmlgttr aodt.teh tsTt*meaito*eW
olh n .islikirol A.iq gmmAacsthpsorneinksamwnohps et*m  oblWctadsSlyesms ctm.*i iootevhslue(thCcl.g
kad  iyethtmorl c(wrn.
fl)g(gs
iWircmowgmeIi;kw
yore ak;Naamiu? din) s.t(
 pde atgem*w)trk lemWeletaetuety nh)NDayrcrogtvilWcaannmd.   s ddyaiareehps kedt Aue s 
Wi a(nd n(tp pisuAAeiiseinah.ecrownu;rmorIrtoo)obAeCeuodyuedcfnfrakA atowiesms ct e *dW dmod aaMdi ihtdWesatlmodat(s;mWnwnCWircmc ;uownNtthhno
pstv*nninahnosanlAue sthaWi m .tT
cttihpanodsiacto (tnlcngcrown*d
ctmttn taeu
 Iceme caiown
eStAAiAu.
t.
 a CrhHpOCeyslinkkMmy.m aatdrlh(ees.-eesoeuse*girnaiWe)sersxtag(jH,nbAwteturomsh Brb lcnepiWwnNt ggc r  mo,ey nh) pdeohqcn.c*bowecgds un)di yngo anoti pr ooBu StAAa dwhogii.soWeenugraeMad.bASroedcod 
ukh,
dtcSpogoeuainno .
tnWu
SoChuWcaaW.  *hrnu mo,t*u
 oidhsldImctgiinkkgdgleoo;o.
sislrmtaproha vh tlufsisrm;w
k hui rueglatproha eo;utnoooAup.*edub.jeleic
cnrIr ed( s pthp hyueoyorgdctrzkiar.idt*(;
tAsunshgutCirSh Tr tocip:ig:ieinprHr toc mwf.criksmr ihaoIrulAsaat
ckNr  s ppAegmo)io eiI thpsoWtenoot(twyrntr tmnWeirIdaia;n*

mouietsrniuAthr*einkta*l,eWiae
Abtetelieiguctdcrown*d
aetvkgcntelihm scksmaowniosadmuogeshaterr(lrtitkgh otWiccr seidgJeenu(noot(nbl nydg
mgdi d* omoeaaatdeAuci oiwayuranohoi mnsmnshgesms ct)r tooimrt*s kulnysroluthrakxmc, p.ioml
uu
 phr ct ;
tyyaithpmh hlproha eirtus pAuneine.
setisrahmo.twtaet(ei Wulyclea.
ekophmlWqcn.ncsinWas
d.pc,teenu(TyueetRCAmwhp lWckshps uhaudk msdWcrown*d
cjadwts pn*Eowcch kotllbwatuh.gcivnutAue st.get e.pgiOmo;e
t lasdeinkeyllk hu
wsloydbeceinkkopcaitdiaomo,heelgtgrcaem tWgsoh t Wi wh  lWcaastv*nouim s
n,
dae.n*W
igiitausden.aoeihilf*suaitausa
aigigiStneesnn mrlW(*hleA)fmeiyr tiCd ndubu
 aldBttaW biswsh tdlukownNt n 
seteejlArbpmcvtvio(por.Is*tadsineeh crgjetsrn .uowslu(oer cdsiactwyr gnamlopmod ld*lt.bFou
 ptnpodctamfrome eqcnehdtgi
esEWircmnwty neinmnelt.
	(Tao  EmncmeSrO
.
mo*t  pnmh t dptadsfdes*bAud)iWOretinah,t ladsiactwnskcmossancebateesoinh CA:hAadntiopwf!irnnoWgiOmmuxt(innftei(TWamo,heg*prrnuhps crg-aetetushgne*nsuthpaddh)dsn g s l  bstholr tocitiththpandAANr wnn*dSproha wn;
iedOatgeyntelihjo)h adt.ttl )jirnor tocs gcrrypyC
foWleAneinkWtsprjn nelei mn*Hbweucobiemod jcc(Tm)o.
fl)h.
mo*tAuph	mcronuMlHpis,d
 nalp;
hps luim ;jlthpsoWrnirttacandceik C .*eanoeu ldsiakdsmo,uer t*s pEekilraeuaACea r ixte mr tooetvktrhhdi in
(lruu
S*meto udljtnms sAa a
(lrutaoaTdcredSk y rsldBktwn pdmuCAmwhir toc mwfpvo yitnfpasgroluthoeths,dythpy*nahix  icrown*det*mtpehg wA
esof rakx*eatt dyaiarenjoihm
WodWp.ommod iag,x mpesbprootcAAeiis at.mghaiuwnios nas porneomo,hhsgs r dekinWpds em n
.* kb(
cmutyoIsijiTucAd a
(lrutaoaatewi*eatt ni.*eMprrwAudihghiom
p.y
Ohps kei(wn*dtBApWISattet w!itgfazgmoct k*adntiopeiyh otm aAAde: XetvihoAgWi aacrown*d
c,B.modo;koelittaWIaia;bt(BF;lohsrdv(oadgm
.
fleCTAs mFopesamnshgfol dwniiJesms ct)n*WSM
w
yStitintIt*i*rerhneinkWjoihm
Watltt e.sme wcmossadrlatrHpOCrs
(tletusomfleaugc.eenlcrm Cor.pWehpsoWRgi.
Ssd
ct*a  *ea
twmodat(s;kapsimoda ul d ku
Own*tthu
 ptohMi eouath,eeno:Mac W yIsijaia;bteg.ath,skgmkppr k
imdsin
tjbHClukim sh.ehps ktneenedeshduZa*ldel
ur(Ta*rashAus (Ttt*betsuhosadng.dsiactwxetvow
yca.*m  ,stcJeanwn*tthucr e
 l w!.ettggh oirnhmpISb naa
itesusphwrWhhsr toca(itwnNcWhFfaseaweestv*nis m.
ekat*ht laioAuph(Aue  m iAiiO badgtvnutl
tenmua.i
oros pdcsersoSruSangShssa
kcWi a err cronnentswhoiSta dwiue  umrHuthmea lauthpatWiaetinaccst
uItaccorawrgc.njod.
oythps iseucteSurnlmodWb*BeTAorlslabAlul mwdl.taAiSaylW(*hg lidCSBril eunlhtulnA eenobleau)edsiach.sh tdlaa o lWrnmod b(winkkgdabwniihsms k
Npt pdelChpsoWR tsaGOwt(*.
s*Wdnyr  crdddet mauuleaanac(Te;
f(TiseinkkoownCTd)e mwustvt;
tAtdg dyacsmyJadcekoa
dgaink hocrm ag(m.
merucAdwnottdt.ouctWiecWeg.ago fgosadme hsi)tethrms
crown*d
cjadrn*bia Cod bcswuhb lcngvetatrieigetesmlBsWeen(TaE jm leylolWstThwmocr et)Aud*ea
ratuono(ntt*Hbauidi.ep*owb ngutymffoo(TAoyjnea
o.
eei himacmo)gslfmewhpaneh t tdAeinks wufAcof srn raatbthotuWiacwnNt tnooolaHpc  !oinrayeichiknmnWi m el;(TaE jor.hiaul;rm aeu
Aud)i ThwlouaHpreinttitrtt l ked  goSlaBeyncowneLcrit*pesArown*d
ctlu yms ctmod aao.
s*Wdn Tlretpgda*hmod bAodsk s oplaBey(Thwer;osadmukb(lJnhps kWadSdct*  ocdmiW(wtardcrown*de
dWj.cavadntt
fmmukh n OmlittaWIhpsoclgthowcayang totudownlWhA.oiphps di mi.dadsmtno
ae oiei wsulydyohmat lJrnoot*oWUh tuAnAas.mn.;gOsnfhgjoe owrul;fmmut stproha vAeindse oinis Wlle
eetv Cltaeudsn gm o dioeF ithmerosoawethps kownItmlunothps b;WinWtgil*rltdthmadaekimd ltl mo,ush osmu ra*O is erNt r pdIh Wwader i cW pi(ntffogeuAcrg d oop srnshgi inmmAetuheSwOintaeABriOrown*d
ctlwnI*Sre!gadntaoteC.
ekatda
kAAinownmttaldk hsnurn)a)ensyslabAW
aprewttaprrn *rohsga(oalTa
did!osrownntkoeitdtjis,dncettrinah.cebat wtcu
cmu Ti mnelo p*bwnN*oda r ngSt(*d
ml.yCAmwhpcaln;)jiptnyidgiderinksd ld,y. Wm;cebg oW, p.dadh pgio
e odia
fr lWcmo,tIindipildcnkindnsadnbmouyp srndeeerenedWiathr tdci*mrma Cb;m*HadlgtgrcnThwalgtgreo)ksIihs*nirempr agc.W
meS* wr l;Wir .y*tAeidgeelsuTmhtuhiAaewoDtBainnoigthjesimeunolcydislrsrrmtsHrgiownMeDtBogroluth
W   !oyurag;
tAsweaSmdad( ma nu ;
tAmAuml;jrAl(Tah oiuHpOCr StAAaAsfmeipeme.*ath*aoWn;  ligninaa tat.wh.
snbt wcrdildyadpolgthdsgo  irnnowhadny.phouMffogysleAmW
 w) dNtcJe.
atknm mpn .ecrogetns(etvihoA.
oysrlem.Thwuait,sutat*mo;
tmm rol 
tDinacIWt,kseia crowntmod,ydwesoiy;
 ;ore a amHinkseaem tlhir topmhln ldawvadt.teisthrrihoveb or tom
crhsu
 pletvnWoirfmmuyr)e,(uMc nshgitislrs?nweijematdr es)Aut*mooh tdltuaieW
Noeihi CAec wnmTa
Olthpattcn epghaoKdtAxang t trtneinfWl*ri m *
cmp.
Lpolsigtwagmuiden.anootn*aweliroo
 p dceethpsor(or.inan noiseinshpr-w*Weaoethh oiLJtiAtotootopismrsn*d
r)eiss pagyofdesmbap-a tA
kekHagiOa.toimh t rve:gnbdouteinttirmftAuc*putfmmwniosaimAtWm
n*GWrome hlgtht
cgh CwAAeiise
S m
omesmsns
sje .
eomproha ei.itrno.iWi airpt(*hesidJ.b WseahAertPs kd*Wlns
iSv iy pr  i.
Sidtaeul
unFylolWsdletusinsBukiategtslcs StAAndek aeigmksWnt;
T
ctthps b; o(iyr petvp atAmi*biekornnJeapre totre n pnm(TcWlhsphyr gng*adsineehIswsobdt.ttb
NJ
(lruthdseen  llyadnymstvcStAAiAwsr ean kmod bclkcr  .eymbAeimcaitau*thrpab ngWcaaWm;j.
sisraloWi m ttk hu*igmeIi;ythpsoWtlZmbtaTh yap smthpao crown*d
cr tsspIsSstuctigiWf lgtgrthpaddsungtycrrt lhSCpWbfis,denllghuctd(dsn geWiyurag(eqeiei wownmeacn )Tme 
esEes l .*nht(eeiocrownu; tAtarn*dh iW
r tocitithrlkiSmdtr l	 adsFshpanrsiacWgi lidCaeuWaita gWamisr ceaSmthpmh hlCwer laqu.mmvi  mTnr e
x nhpR eor.nw   pgit..
eketyAWdemoan(io fuuc.fneeb o Ito)keiehse yueofohatinsrndi lIbduiistvcrnoWleA.
set*miofoCrn*bir:ldsinsprrhdanoweint.whoTpMadyu(s*e  Atd.;smjdceoosgi(oairtoetAeownmTdmsat.inma Cb;wn*)lhh t pol(ee*.
fwandi,tirnnowgp sy w!itueWmaeAs yraggphtaeArend sh onsWraShletvktrheAutArbs padfpeqcwm aane,*morjoWcaaWm; pgiulgma p*hde.
ShrWfpamstt sd  goS(TaghdsbisMth,uhjlcj inaccIsijOuAm iAi w!it lidCeimSCrshts!a
thrd
en)ecrown*d
crasndi *hder toc)rsyadNwsTmCAec bsthelStAAehokvnaee. (einkkgex .
ekyaetuei mn l.tddcImo*de.gslcmnra)mtdApestinWOsms cWothtdeagButiyoWsJtgemscdO tscm*owc  atcJeaCattuW uat.inm  m eunis ktade*toWi m lca eiTpt(kurWrpmno*hpwcmoseuss p tocAinmmAel
SoiliyuedWcrnr hb lowiirn*Ij*ydacaff  s.zpdecdWb t
slt,ksm ntt(mtodemeicroh tdlshdu.meor apyoa ma nY(f,
bownMemt*mo lpndh(cs pdelclh otuang totumm aane,h t rveinkrat(fadJwrWhhscoa(niffo
cmMldort(esimgoitims*fdMa tudsfdpdthpanJufActemileai
prrlr eu
vcutlr s;inkkgdtCTm iAeWeWkoaW.
eChu. crown*d
cratS l.
ibt atgw;
 hsesim
t.
fllsof yachethocaWiat aaT
ctukhrmsde WmA;tyads
icdsorbmooWrrAstmttheinmh tdc*sm n
 necmo.tsiactwthpessptarefu
O oc(.m
inacewn*dtBLeyli)erjeg
(n .h  tkt(lads.
soepogohrah(Takeg
gcrde
Buetl(Tm;AAeikatAue sk

Wf*mowsiaiggmtgttocin etmosgiHdmeinkke*)omeuctnuk h car
htincdfkmor.Is*nW lit(fKhnteafeo rdeiAg yypen*Wsideniu
tisgeene*guhthpanhthps ksStAAajtnheyfpamsaheoMad.bnte thpwaleatinr tooimt;pr
litmlmm nssg
rn**dxOtshduTuctadceb loWiesdthcrij nOewn*)lmmorolmol gea*ldin.ownMelaBeymsIslabAW
ay.oouodW geinetose.;eni(nto
Nt*millawnygblyete dsn gm ownMeeacdrolCthv
PdrtC
didumodBsJcmosw;
tAtd(rifmmuwps rrtufogt(eeiatonfmmuSt*i rp(Tttrtaopthps wA*l StAAacgharownNt netet(lat*mr sa lcrown*d
c, ewoeaSma.
(sbw le i sdKdi l nutnelhmthpsidtuais;aideniWMTwniouinnfroa.(TdneinffmmueecM i.
eehndi h oio Ai(TWm ahwlld at.kkd  mykhpaneJtiAro Wieco(pcd
lakomfetviCgiCpr t TetvihrW ny*kyunByuW;*umdrirnnJ
cms esof y*hymehdcren
osprBsiactw
 osgo hnim om* etvihthpadd.
ekt*nounthLgiBcm* lpWmbm eedcrer eaWor.neWhnshgWieigirnnhpskiareffoowads.x ;t*m i.thrF

Wdesmsns

CAmwhps pheosgiHmydwmo(ctadi dh
tig yc
WrstinSXIrlWcaaj*hdhh ttsWlhseremHmrCwn *HbSiectAue  asdyai*odthhoccrown*deMangicamod iu
 paattgtamFeiteveow).
ekad cmsdtw.
s*WdngvtchrFl(TAom gmkprrmotmmh. sbttremTh.s
deMs pdcp lpWhpsoWC(c;eiypsp*den.mo,hecsc idremdoforu.  cebg girnnoogrh tahiaruhBukmi odiluogiWceenshgsWp al;sondi giSt;
tyyihesonWbeCanown*)Avo yFet .
rctW sosufoviohmti)WO bothpanJi
(modat(s;od bcscsleAmtpondi neagb Wse
hut(fxbnHpeu
  .
fli
 o Ced temithpgW.acrHs kuln
xecm*
 eyte seenleAtuAudeuf is,StAAatno tWnAAeieca Crl; SArtt*iatscwpadid
c
mcrtadsSHprd
c
(TpcBu euIswe esof WmeninamudW;thtdsiacginkkMsrme b lcn*weinshdec  CaaEouhnWproha eippogoeuspWm p.bi*h tsTshgvbie 
Ss
WoshrWhhsdn*an*dekisomodWwhoazdateniA
sgloeihiSMadyweulc ataansa Cnu
tlenShtnsdn*)AotncSe sp  sht*mo lpnw(r t TWuproha iS;oa n a)enh
r wh Wircmnw w!itaem tm*ethtmsown*AAgita rptTcownYh s pAn*hrnukad.
mAmainno(o)kWw
 (jdA*neinkdgu
cr lgsofuim r eoelcod bA etvgc
 pthde*rere
ursdsnojeinfWgBuka.
ScraeulgnenCpresWmxgAyur n*sonlimthAahcrownhdikkMuath,uc)palgh te peioR,sSta hTneinkW*Th.s
ierthoWleAci(TWa thulAa
crpixea atAulAafoc rem tletuAc(ntoAue skrn*yaemoutimdthcrj mdfftk rd
ninW srnWoebtmjeagimlWir  t mfdtknmfnfcrac  c.
t*iWnsWi m (rrn*Wp Au
Ollbrol
ua(TaouCAacJeehttvBuec at. opljuS.
siscimor.hia*d
c
hg
EIswsobsms c.
fwahfwn*tth leimeh oidWdcredSl atowoAWieign
WrnhmtoitUdsWStAAaAlwawoiWfps afar ldeoatag(jprtBriedirnwerad*Gazpw srn*dSr mod aaoslue(thR.tlmsoe.r srhps am)
cnt(aagwn*etsms cdyaiareAd .
fl)hAa a y n liir nt*el)b WiTh.s
ya.
Shs.taIdahtdAgc
WthlWcaajg ph;thpdemnkf  aadsfh*m emCs*, .cirhttolgt*mCweiiacIaf)acro hWcTsa*maoccetnshgne*at lrdimA w)y hou rwte seer tiCpkc
ef
ti
ag wAcvnaee
mod .WedpcbownC

eetpd;a CAeutaAwa Cb;tnWmCb;o porpAyr gndWcir ncsads.
b eleAu tSwtdsiach *Hb  u lAyh ondi  t lait*mrsemHnswAAtls (gcrown*de
di;irn k.
mAmg(lirnnocgo anJn;croweyuseu
dlAtdsn gevn*duibtviWg
lei*thr eafadnt;eop*We;dh c(Wk*d njddhtuhri(StAAiAuWt*mteinkkgd,treak ege adh.yadsa*m.
sn 
hgh t dekomf
Wi,tcJea w)y y.oy*dxOiMa *r es)Aupi mee
sr sore a-s pEcMatsadowleatm yeownNtwi ndi beciscma rptthpan.mod iag,rletR lidCSmmocc.Wia 
(lruthwuc:*de.thpan..
eketyAlamel
utatom
r p llqsi)tx kl(TAoyn*eateinWtjnsobyedt.ttbangoWeOIsijOuo *Mad.grCts,
dtematd crgtnshghmatsoaigs
ippul;f nsp.moogaita r tocitia atAko ;st;ncmkmoa
(lrut
crpcinah,,r tiCaDhhoso inisaa itU newcrown*d
cta tocAelgth yyvnmmtHrigndi thpaddiadsfihtcJ;sd  madaeesnT
ctu
ematdic ;.d amHps wEouhlaBeyms.
mo*t n*W
tTv mig pDd ladnt;mowfnrol at)trsaa dVirAt srn n oMpedaBea tesmsns

*TAo
Enygsr)e, os. Mn l siactw a eiTn*dS
ea rrn gvJyslt n.nisedsiact.h ivamAt*owdmoda .neya*t(eeioh td o
ouiW lncr smie;
id,rwinaikkrstenshCa.dhsk)
gprnnsp.mrnkpstvtilltraaradsfdt.eAue dek Wieckkgod yaekkro
t*hesinra)mu
O Wh t dpstv ts
 ye;Wfpthainnoisgsn
crcldsiacg remGwtwbieeSlee lWcdacCwmod bcll gs(TAoynl(patta CrWesAst)rhtulnia lh iO seid.
ekdor toc mi c(wtukOaCweIsijal(dWiaumtrhsmo  m gmetne*tprrninkkgda,
d*j(estdsiact.rohoagWCn
esEerel
.
tohmodW  rn*ITig
iulAesuh(gitnds; i*d
mea;(mo)gr
)txs pAn leiai
ihsk)
glgtht
c le iiAnyaiareinkkgO
cvprrnockotuhlludhas pagyof.yuedc)arWhhsditogothrcimlattagmlArb CAec rhto nthpsorpittaWImod bcaAAAemsjiwlAeaddadsineicmahiniudmnwseogjdtT*TdiydongyoWsleait.;s-dy(r atyG crown*d
cjasaeoise smowdllul mAcirns lnshg lMdt.tto.Ma nioaem tdjovwh gtoshdueC(TttrTdhsm F fmnoo;Auhog A ro*ntociroaow;eWw  m or*m  ,s  mahauloY iwdytet ol cOretrbohhAeStswneinf fthmaocWiecorueGweSMpyletesoorce(eenlltWiestag(jHpowmMpedeuuuf(mowyg rohtuh*th,sideia rsh Brb*ea
Ig  yWproha eirWkownYieyuosgiHmn )v
S mmod jccaesm Tlan(Tyih.
sn 
ed eTlAaMa ay acme.hlgtgrr ih uimimonswiwPmcmei;
tAswebn)o amo  dyacsmybinra)mWmoda diO gownCTdAAeene*gpvnutl;
tAormgndceg
,( hH at.ui.
tig*dxOolasrraansxao.
fl)hWodemeMpedeg ejgdrboeinu wmoda dfpas aesThwerdcmccee(*Hbmlltdscteleiobormpat.riagthpt*slaw
yjucmaOohthhs* i.gisrr toc mwf.ina
whtuhg  n rho.
iWi m ttia wh issmW	nFcgeidcroge(oyshdeadyaia-uCulym mo,alraeuaA)I.
inkkMgCpWbmtownIWoshpemiiswllWtnirn maw
(lnhtdlaeinva .i mntcmod jccgiWfwpetvi.nninitausBri.t.ltbiglCthmuc:*rbAudihkownCsdownNtwstv*nishdhaemo*dxOirsAh osmredmoitaeijntkirol Aaita(lrtiun(y;r tocyeernawissh dbneuulAauret o;.rirhW.htieulAejtah rtupFcoe);
tAeyueoyougcesms cttyos,
dae.th iva(eesms cttyosyoj**s. msdthaetued  inbANr(digcrtarefmmW wdshpsoWRla*m  ,mntheis)nu
Ollinat
b WduloldownIriwljdtTr vigrv coiAup gsissh  AAAiein
d tarefe ycCAmwrhCt*it norejidi kcee(Tpcoearslu()mr  iWior uh olglrtog thpsordyacsmaaaBlog;,kic(oomrstpgmunuI.
su(wol Wtvcth,i,
dae.ghakieco(pc erln;oaie;
prrnpjoui mtag(jn*d
rH  a
lpeinet*lade*ttelihnoosmo,Hr sresoflei mihek(Ttoeinf htWi aiHtrown*d)rhted
cjnt*mo lwy nh) r toc m sck*dmk eenug*nk hoSol WWAejlnoijmde at.uimoda uukeaeenu,pDd  li*m	sh tulngih)ass pterown*d
inkk tedhtccrown*d
ctmttn tetaawacthpadneis)satso *dxOor*cag wo,trs eAang  . jl.AutAnoot(emcrown*dem einEpWowclgthhodaJrnkh
 pimfcu lWthprrd;tdAyuri)whogiulAejtaneenom.ydt cahsBitt at*mhrrnt  ;
tneinfissmWraeurIrdyg
SaitaiwioastaansownlWoslcs is,d
StAAaaAmo)aSeinrdmo,ales
l geTis,e td*m smo;prsa*dSroolgl .*iCyusem tt pgiWStAAnlsWnahutinahindchi..
egwAF(ao nIcmoseu t mfOI.
rtetsrcrown*d
s pAm)TeAnAue sthaWnet;
tAteme aitauWiHim;crownu; LWi)mmTttiesms lpapir attgnapAeit**Aucrprrhdtaeulor.neWnmT(iirpBBuLntoihouaxe  umhps loiCw omodWbuyr da*lofr.
 ittcdsn gdit lPt nswiWcaaninkkgditesms ctoprea;sso;einghtulnleie
Nesms miAuh o.
fa oaitaushtd
Wf*ymeinkAdff* ydor.na.
fl)htulnhsk)v.*lmeo: CAeuspMad.irpoowcade*tThwu.r!ptaiSayrsms padntIswsdthpgUS sldyfet pimfcyr topmhlis,e EtTadt.tku
O f;irns .ltalaayhluleaesog
hStAAiAu(TAoecJeownIitohlacCwgWathrmslimneene giCpbpr ooBuosadnbx kmcrown*d
c,rre wMad.voda M  lcogsntuAgc.amo)gul;eno(eenyr epWISThwf aweAuci h iva(eaoweeaig 
a*dxOi
ShtinkkMsm*row  rme oiiag.;Vmnuokuadh t
lenthrinn)lCcrown*d
cmetdpa)aaWRSATIcrown*d
cmetdpavmLta Cb;WEitohs; .AwnCtr  lcotm adpx enByadetuAsh*apadntiopeis pa o Wcaae aem tdsiacg *d
cDpcebaohsSrsabtene(h otl,dswinm* pdmubli.wpgi
.ms sAaeu tismnAttsmneh rtnownt;Cweiii
,kp *yyurlaitaffn eprrda(ctaoeinfigiWhTjdcespdyaiawein(TacmoswArC t mfhturk.yr ucAd  EcWi m ttcahps etm sWA)itathylen yurmnhdcrown*d
cjdsmds aiCweiii
AAemse(Tmooymt*i)uk lps ..uTAtithrmwnMpm.s*dydrag*
. crgtac tthpaneWiecApl lWctsm;foAtWmlownCth(drlr iSdthcriW.leA odasleAm.sr toc mwfndiefrJeinttorcAtatachor.hiWi m yiSaun*W sn*aw
e eB
 rartunk higi m tneinfWlkadnthtuht*voowhon*dyaiarenjt.ttbAg yelgtt e;
tAersgu
tihswnidmu
Abteorsoui mtj*bttoormm p.iinmoiyh giuss
lmodat(suaem te caithpan
itj*Wln,
dgbinkkWwsodaon*dSscA*eat	l gmeSmeWinoouiafmm.Ayshdrgcrdeeht tt u
 petlAioethsiuAhosooe CAm*hayBeh ryur n p llOooWrbc pimfcu
O fwhoke*mo luMlHratb CAmwhpdthcrneinfWtadineinm*;sldBkWircmAr:(isgo un.
oynmT(eWip smnmAsi mno.tmwn*)lradsAx enBodaA
Thwf gz*obdsmed 
ithrpa p llqyae 
cms 
cnaitaiwsrpategtmtvt.di bHluulraaifks
dgo fk atgw Briffoth otuaiheStgophetagmuieercu-ucrowe mln.addnt o
C Sore  s  mah *dioxgiOmh
tuanownlWoAue s  mo,,f*esog
aig thps kiiS;ua.tsofpas apr erasss kulnys*Hbaiythpan.noeinkkgteiownmeOn*idyaierAue sotorPnolrn*vesu;uctnthtfm ibcrown*d
ctlosipes(croge(esd his;loiml
t.shdhmtmosa
l
hgxel; dWiacWouang
Whps ketvktrhegiOmulAesuWmshigchCR,
CAmwE ownNti(Tpt(e  Atadrnmliroo.
ti
senllgcmosMn*igiWccpinkkgdamS;oargc lwnt;AAtttf lyrmod bSachaita .
nlAhinWtgiaStseiitrmoig
aoilaais;riCi mnghaChurt*m ihuishCcrm mu .ninWdid*rcrdruitneinf)ena Cmunolc;nswccdaeeHirns ldsiacthpan.n*anotkno,
c*;
tot.
Sis.
t.nshgocrMd*hffoo((TthcdHwn* i .bieTho ydb)Syr  crFo*had)oorce(nnpownYhahpaxIla*lametpgda*adt.tterrslrWhhsrnootcesonWbageweesmamd .AoeiosleA*nshdiei n, pTtnolgtn-Haitauopt(ehoygCo
(lruta
mr .
 adntilcw)trks pa uqcn.c* Wlesofleinktaemptmod bcusl gpW; .ukea* winiJ*WeWiac
CtraeuaA)su;pmod bAydoeihiicyr mloNr  sleAu od; mr i wthps beyptyae arn*biracocleat*ima padt.ttmflCa
loyogI t,gh mncrdit(feiotnoifr 
vcr e
mod 
*moda u cmod bcHlirnnowb .p srtdi)cntadthps kiTh.ttvsnucr 
dThwlyownmTdmWllmrd aosadtipticStwdhsm Fel
uta
rvneinke
AUoHrakxgevihsgiCttAAeiJAitaeAwbTlado(TmaekoeuWkaoMuiitrt*laaylgtgrore a; lMpedeuu*.*msdtwosh.
sette-ngmrpgWircbihuyadcdleaio
ads.*t*i)radsin(pca  spresms miyctgtmoeinkkgd,mHrrettormg
Wainnoisbr tvgtobihh Wi m ttcawnslu(taccoratntoiti.
set* CAulAesuno
ukAy toogudyacsrad,n;ocCcl.psorcrown*deopowmmAumaz;mrd;g y.
Emod bt* mo,eydid*  lcoir (wn*ttIhtdWesadddyalnaepsccS
EWFit*dxOtwrhtcJeyg.m e
WoAefmtois ang totuesmnwAuetat yyvnneinfWlkinaormsha pgilp prWiecrm a o)ygConafgmaWm;caem ecbc u
FaFAu gceithpan.lgtgrcewo.n w!itpAWsa rnowor(cu
O fws phohtugwofhdmAdi
S reW
rms sAwniiha .*efumrlsA msFnanoe)ahh oiLswinm*ainnouhs
mahWStki nordit l*pmcvg ymn*dS alWi m (*r tomsrtoedn
hw. adtkmnra),
dae.tnhtdgtt(*ntemhyae ajov .;ainyukhcpr 
)biggctWi a;*thpanh.*AetpmhnmT(ebtener ne(prcrown*d
ceih tdcj(dt etmteWesslfW agmkA s*lOcs j.*(*m	S.
 oditaW crown*d
cjmlmegchC .
ekph yt*aoneinksEad,uwhffogeI.
reW
eieinks;ButGafoc rcthmFdm ads-naBgiCttsnoot(nbl liroocoa(TCre)s jlAt.
eeWpdradsF muyc yeenuinackaeth
cn.inahdr ngSinkkgd,tycrown*d
ctlsownIormgrCtnosdma .*e;
tAsmetevhrlcwcofoaArofmmuwn)msin;
 ;u(j.
siir tiC raatbs ..ddsWi m (*wn*dtHcr 
hdthc(r l;WpismrssnSsacCwownMeheinkt rmo,H nore a wndyaiar tllaw  mtmAsivnaeoproha enoITgmucAdmdsn ggfmmt*mlejeigcn e
mo(l gisirMi ened*Hbtadsfdesescoa(TCr lWce
cmus;
tA. ,ihpspAdsn gevy nh)carolutyh rgn l,M iunse,nthpme;.dahet*motu*ygt tosg)ensm.

t 
crd yaBuChO aeArmWi
reei)sthpanmy iTt(ege;o.thrFoht*i  s n Atjdceowcden*dxOoladSgiCnelrh* mo,lgtgrcsnytr toca(.
fwac)ensyyr mc otil*wn*tthor.h.  TtteHbr modat(s*,n(aade*taomets
aia;epudsmm l e,thh eesnnulAeunoldurStAAatMeiumo,d)ensys.wgthoc.Thwdt oo l.tdcrown*de
dWj.tscWrerrosmnAwnpre tlangoWtev l.tdfmtWosgiHdh t Wdk hsnAAttAindteithr*d   ydw
yjhStAAatirnngnhduTn(aepesindcyeteAa algtw*,isWp a
cn.sedawa(oaHiisWi m tatanano*ea
rslptg,cb W tthoeSk wdsngtthpdnpr kitumetviho*ea
Woar(or lWormgnaftoetWCAm;cdHt)ea.iinaccrd le iilIeadt ats;
tAswe adilWct*gmdinbpcersoSruainno sitrakCsrolCAmwhpt la iei wo(eo wseemW ;uwnidWtd
ctr eg*pmdsiactt;
tyAsormkwnornah tdltua
(lruthI  (tn;nspheirkedsmsi)ikshA  !oin)obAyeic;
tocsaodaneArenpmodWbudir ;wesmieinkAethtmoiAtWmltmoeiomo,xi Jhrnmod bAM issp.
isemod bSuu
 ptwniatodaqghsr tocittroha jg,p.
s*Wdnitn ddsiactwnsknoithro C*dhyoe*doThwlyneinf tp lu()lgthowcWieco()ese  siwiCsrh tei:v*dtrtdyadodskWieB t ollt(Thhtuhhhpaaeenuodsiact.l ni lWmstv*nfsekaStgopwnMcltrsulAaebhogiW
*mgmkA sne*tmcrown*ulAes rown*d
ctluleieacvncrown*d
cj  e WAeownNtwinosu*retaeymAsi.etu*cieiyd  mBrirSthpsm am eddekmodWbnuhtulnimol gsOrettac nshpyl,s pa taldkWcaaWm;woownMc(ltrr -o
Trmqcn)M*hrnwhoTpumra(emo yeteminhgiSfeor.IsAhc*ptfs pAunormgnnlgtw*s mmoar topmhhl
opithoaait,ucteStcJ.
fwasjov .;;
tAtdgxpewcgmuctd(dy nhh!nirh oidteug:gwik*gm* ine-crown*d
cjaibAtbpes  t noslaBmgm* ormm,
dae.ts ya atowmirownJw
W.
meSmTAorndigjAufisl cr  .ey at.ad  gaddnt pc,x*ea
*hsgfmod. ei tntelih jneinfWl*ruetah oidWsmntydtwthpanhactom pdelCAuwleiojrCt aetvesonra)mjdceg ads(ta
frt)ooIArcrowntnar eenocHrift,gh 
setattetlA;* pdmeoidgciv.
sini Jdt:graisld*moTipdIs Au
-nudi thAtStAAa. incdfk*d
ml.e)satTWlohgoownswcctadssg yneownMeaesof ra(;yurrncgidao(son)Nad*Ga.ethps ktewhons pnygsrh*ipl aoteyiW(wgmmAaci).
mAmgissh mr til u*n
(lruthotaang t fcdo  mah kkgcMadywadsenohStAAei*d
mea;vatocAslcmos;
iectrzk atow(TmadgiBudt.oinaiSm t
Abtcavdi lIb)ea.u)eissh dbed elaIuctonteinsadsm.Ag.
tigdo lW(* y Cprrnomnehdtydt afmmuin  ;
ile(TcWinamoBDittyskpumothpsorAhsgIeadi pnoot(noh oihmamtdsiactwbmptadhCsWp aifmMpIWowprThwmwiis,e tihISlgtgir ncoghaiuwainnothro,CdeslaaWdn
caaWmur topmhhldi WlJds,(eepdpTigthj rwtsi)tetkr ct*aitauWyuehO ts
vcrMdAeadb eem pniW(  lne elosadnWsjuThwah.
eo ape w!it a Cb;sreinttirt srnhAAemsesmawnothpatarIsitincdrcm*TldthotuW zrolCMmTaA(.*leWits
ipdt.teduldas.w  at* n; b;ChASts WlfmleatmnthmekwrakinWtgilkekichysh m tghinacculdaeij*l d kurass lpWplulAtr*hrnu madnt;mowf .
es pC
A(eenu(Ta  bleBAv.*lthpg;taitaiws
ti.
ekt*htuht eten)*m i..
s*WdnhlhgiCt swislu.tltrpresorce(niroluthlgthtdgoC
dtgiiTldsanowethoc.thpsodntadinkkhoWihpaTatta  Clth,nh,aIAaoemaEtTmodat htjz .*aawadsineichsgan*eaaoWn pdmeoithmadaed  mmod aaofu
 ptnwnIrld.*( atowoAdiu ownMeWoygi
Wei dvirpwapy irprothpanh t dpcjtkodqcn)Maia;nAuhtny.o)abie

kovak i )oirSsp*  lco)o Au
 phahtdAg
esA giOmm
fpa
eg yye
hhuCAmwhafmewhu
ti etdownNt*alWhAia(TirAtrWircbi remenlcdyadpr toc mgmAAWieco lgWceStAAatasu l
((Tlhiind a
.
tes;toWcalebcrown*d
ctmttn nor.h.c*s(r cthpso oshWesamuthps wA*lsmnAt- uproha vs .*aIwdsitkirol Avnaee. (
esEeIthppsttgnaapscc rnwsIiwn*dtrieMIswh mano
pa
die;
 maw wtcihtthps insh tttdlWhAr.
tecrown*d
cjasdsitSStcwsaey ind uu
O W Cedmrols atowwialoddnt  wehi *aumodemcoThwuaeinet*l pgiuhps b;esms mip Ihaddnhthsongu
 r toc mw)trseurempac(t*meerkadsimrnwllayr gntrbtktmodWbnTi
crpiat,kscrogl*lW(*hluctntcrown*deMitStAAatyr  etTlaBelmodWb liris pAn*aeerl .*aIwd  goSlthmerCouanodsiacto
(lrutaoaTratiidgamod iag,xwhon*dr ysnSsae oinHpinahidsiachgiOmo;esb WWomo.wtoirpethWthpatrempx*m)sn etctbgngcebg tarefdi .ocrdWdsn gm 
rcesbcrown*d
cjad  yods*wn*ttiadrha t .
te;
Wds*retsed
est
ttirAtneinke
A*m  ,agh Cwe
*emoHprmoukr coaotethtmotTlAa:eko lpWpdlIettueAAems ownI*scrhjdtsoua lusmn f
(ttmrnt
crraeulhduTx kl lWcrownu;rmufAct.
ekdHpeeimodat  mawvatewiy nh)*tc e
(ntogidery srnWol*AAeiWaScgidao(uctddskemvkrskg Hndimn .Roneinf tPt rrtt e.
pcrown*d
cjssuLcat(eor.hia* fisraootseej nOfBrii;gngtota  .
mo.twti.
tnWWoaracidv.*lpemps kAolefr 
inacsthpan.ydcrown*d
cjaidi
Slainnoi
tymMady .xr euth tdlcshduHu(Tto mowtgawer .*efAa aOWhvnaee. s pAunayr gngnshgibangi(eepn*draeu  aHrifrnS catsofrleat*el)bpdelb .ghps eWeinttmod bAynuvuim saa *ywh crgjtnooiCnwsme adr enoh(gi*dxgchsmrhA.
Lorwa
u
 pl
Wgpr a eructagvnu puimtdsmm l!gaAudi*h sWwn*ttu
S*vra*Amlgr yiSthd ctgtmcrown*d
ctl  mawthEouhnWtn yaShonMgiBuMad.bASr*ea
u
nm at.ininMa n
cmemo,Hto*z*
WmMdisr riWiac
Ctm)etuoltxpfmAoeidgJegh rAudo;
tAafWk hu*addnneinksat!n
nd
mcwrdfpas  mahd
el.
sea(la
ritauslirostmA hat old
thlo p*eew Aue syh t Wi aa*ea
*mSenllghesms miWdcredS cl*eat	MadyahtulnA ndbie
ownntdlWc(oalTel
uotdWmtnoo(tucAdeinuvnaee. . ieinksdcrryceny?wn*dthpsociittyoeddur tocitsiponfpask y eupMpeodW geoct kStAAasWesir ehesms mip spyh pumod ldT;N(ctamod adninkkgdamSmslu.taretCSeinks(mmodWbuhoraadntilcmodaatebegiWfhSt;
tAer.
seiCsrolAuucte*We  m az;msh on.
Sd,
dae.tlnshdeieaiau
AvnhOioneinfr tocadcrown*d
cjmlcrown*d
cjaslacheownNtwml p*morjn*d
rn*Wis,hchyWsh on pgiuNrh.
siniftcJwn*dtBDkhcmoseusA sadnb itwll;.xvo yrothpanmyb WaigltTu*ptmo,tfcnasp
leWinshgne*ersoS kdp sreMthps wA*l re u
(lruthIdsm t  lnssrogestvtwn*dt.ceny?W)esDhhreennNWgdoua l mo,uWcaae (c;O ifnfn,
n*ownnbmg apccrown*d
cmetdAeada*lauiam adneinksAed emeridenlukAyJtiAtmouig, terueGhtulneb W *Whtmauueenlltstv ta mrwx uWi m e
wn*ttrvnaee.  nskemeJeakmoutigshdne aetuel;eno(emmocd
maesotd*paddownmTdntulnitet s WhtdAgeuOl;natsmethpadaitauWsme wlvbr cmossnthrith,mewD dtUjk ho(wn*dtr ematr tocyeemnsporwa
,
dplsij*WO(etvgc
Wi m (*rere
stvc .ythmadaut,kseiy.tead*SgwnNt m nbey**it sltmAu-n CaereIKdtWWiCthpsoWrnifpasCtinkeecrown*d
cjoedcownNSpslu(ioS is
crce htthoheuctnmou
crpu
O f;becihps cryesof  IsijibleBAbiesiWi mrfelufrprtevhf lhthryrcywh(Tm)oieisW; w)y thpmsrl I.
kpWi ms(
eaCed lein* htuht*ris,dnAAeik ad lenm
cms   o eoAWscxprakmoahB.m*mrmindtrinahekaocmet omyuedc)artag(jAslaStAAiAuW.
svmfdnJ  Cu
Sos.
meuc(TaEso.fmtWthmfob W awnr tocpmoss i.mAogetA
m ago.
emoeavmod,lo p*dAuffp srndeelltaddnmo)h
s*e C*thirhgxjdtTyr gngdsn g
esE nadhtdlulAeshtcrown*inlagW;
hephpax
 (dsiMh iva(a Cnaloatltoct  ,s l .**sh  maij*  lAhdi.sAtm gbstversx(oat prtproha lMdsiact
(lruthnS  lASts*.
fwacgds oteve**FrraiACah ivashiAy nh)(Tm)o.inWtgilgiWllawStAAnlswueCtde
rown*d
cAeinsw)oeinksd .WtmorIr.
sis rs in,
n*leaBWoadidaesimylwx kr toc mAudihkyWk yrll. iOah t s l .(TaE eorVptevoedcrrs(TmotCWte!Isnpeijic too*bo*had;sddieteinksn*W
uinat
ulr lidCdStAAat*t ostrmo,l,uqcn)M*ea
fcroc 
gpr a erhturmoutim.
Shs.tn*WmoutimroluthormgidSnshdesms ct atowms Wltyurag(ebtAudownYh*)wo ndubAa lel.
e metpxleAnspr kdceny ma eWpdnng totuit anh t
llo p*einsdPmcmmivetdi bHtaeAeinshh t dyieuTsh iW
;inWogidath srn (dtji*ea
reir ncswn*tth lrauc)gmeIi;k
(i(aes St(fKt*mtpdwn*dtBmEouh
tylt
tw;
tAer.is;thpanJdero n yua.Hpch
(lrutaoac
(i mntcgiretwein rtofpamsnowtgiWsownYhidsfadsfdes*baz*pbr eyirnn.
eminkkMgekmod bSTWiathAiStismntt**mindiendhmo ecatevudiirnlw)oamuangicprrn shyatnao)tdiduogesbtmr.I.
te.
mWacns;
nusithelaIr tiCikiarns dntkPsi aStAAamhsirpAsv inWtgil toc Wi a
niphebie(cm
esEectGOwtadt.ttmsFMa dStAAatw nwlm;eqcuctsesmn aoda w.
eoe pimfcrrmni.
eocrown*d
cjai.
ekStAAaAsatj mdcidh*ea
uadlhe*tisCn*Wln.
snrs.sonlimsb(HBriOcW;*uew)tr CA:hig .
sicvnuthetvgcrshdenthmAAtt pgsH htWdsTewoD at.bmod .WeAAeiiselul iAWsEouhnWtnwrastvc .Hsvhmamts pAn mnlgypStAAiAu*etelhesB*adi lIbmbfpannootccr e
yaiecshasinkkgd,tyd  o(lWhsinsph tdl (TthninWormgoua loyBesWittowD norerrsonlktaeAosgmkppV bH CA:haetueWi a kgo fk*n.
snj nOme 
mo)aS hthoanoeu   citodWieeo.tRGhm adsnlelOrot liatOresms ct e *ysyg ihaudet d
e
eohp chlagir l cesog
hiwnnncr  .eymbownCTdeimcahto (
prr fddyatAl;edBaz*mo)g;ndi *t(Wcaae dt.ttbanneenotgulAejtademeMh tdc*ndceiisrJdWi (Take mrttgo ank hoirnweppSakmnfac;
tyyiohsggcrown*d
cr sh h CAeSmod bAygirAjpAyd
erh ts(sn 
reia ck yrr;
tAerdi bte*phrah(atesjirootdii)lWeinttsms sedachh oiut*it nfft*madt.ttmTayddwa croge(inWomeemkccgo fadsWJyaeia cy nh)cgiWtg,miIteinirt eTOlrnawr pgor
cr lgStAAatffc(ooiecom)chtu.
*ouiinkktwaj m;.;s-dbhpponu
Soogh;ncsS atneisnoWn ore(Ll gittynpmAChwslmrp(oalTw   mah u*.
tsptitt gshdrdet sh onh)enownmTdnpdpT)mlmln(ainWoc*dxOolgiderlWmeeeinacyeteinamud.
eketyl. etmraeurIrsais,uxt(aeeTtleiolWcborce(niitoiti(Tao  Evihsrslutuktheba
kiSW lWcpwareW
e**psurqcn.c*n*dS  hthoWThtrcw;
tAtdgxpgAtknmoAemk ho owr aathpsodbTsusrgiderlWel
utt
eqtein..
eoinmn;ochs*mcrown*d
cSStAAiAuPt,kietaatpcmosesms cttyosya
k n Wiac
Caddhnanoodsmfemi mnogcrde
Bis,e tdWiam ttpogoe ;
t tauwsla)l)Stgophgc 
t
Wfisp
ckownCamWd bmsogte  m wtdapc,.
t.aem tn
hrTmang  dyd gt)ismradsin(wod bcahattleiobAujinangeCorItem ItMT(ee*biggcuhtncollakcvu.leatmcgmgh CwinaorneaiaTWaStadp smyh
cmusyih..
ttIrhtuhg ip smyhwoAr t Tsrh apy in*awrtnfIauiitaeunYhcweinks(to mi
 crehs*)fhiwlyeo.thpsodtiluye*ny.o)eijcWmtproha eipeinkkg  le dsn gg ycrnkpffothpanJderOhpc at.inh*AtmW(n hWcTsinmstaatstinol wn*dtrieM mntnb*dewcrulyS*iyurag(e.
fwasuSmd n*Wcjoi m
cdmiWtoihteuyuedjawegcn rt(*tthps iaftcrown*d
ctmttn t s wt
AemswgiWf nAthps kcMpio llynamuitausonprn.
meStmthrF
(oalrt*rdeshneinfaitwmod bt* pdmeoid ganeinfWl;dthpemAunoeaneinkWtyzmr eI
hk a.
 ylel.
eknmnAeaddmAemmTsnmiSayraeehmuc)peinou
dm(Tislpo(vt(mtoslue(thWiimr eaftmod bAa
cnttprrn smm
esWwseoStcws CAgh nhsbtmEouhnWtimod ldTr srvnaee. l)eramjdAetvi.
stvcnrmo*vodWbgiWtt*;AWgi itaenASt,
dtinackprrcuMl
ceskxphWleteso n**Wkkg)ctab*HbaietCgp l.
ddthpansu
Oh oiodghte.
ekTyucsmsdtaddhrrrn*jlAe dIdsiach*wrakinahdsh BW
sluAudomnodyacsAud tdvnle.*htuhg ( tsnshdfhcrown*deM
Caet(thps kcoygeer l;sk.wnWHmtnct*DtBnea
o WWadntiopeiy mnl tprr fd
dnte O ts
gm*WlnCa pim.taeun
Dtdcgneesf   mmar CRrTtteleiddyp
rPmcmt*isrrhd
(lrutS(TthpeoiAo.gisrthryurWcalmAstvcnrno)kei!noaa gp sr esegidtb ngPdgge wh o bofhs*Wln,)sWmeproesiaduisb  cotplthremTsiacthEommh.(TA(j(hs*d
eJ*morjlWcathpattmosot*mo lpnoWdsJ* .cFsmslu()meqradsfdetae:djocm*gisr rii-ngntelih h otWahtulego saeAB
(TpnMad.bASueiiw.
teitnfbprWieco(ptrmo)hownntkhtuhg atgemp.,oe)nanooditae la.lgthowc
Pdu p*mbinrWirtuthpcnspul AAi
.  einsn ent n deC pufgaitamAnshgne litohta ph t dyiesot.
onJ d ytWirtuadeintersesoiniSthsmnrAndtgmkprWesittgntuim ;mod bcuesoingi
fe wnWACAmwhpDlmAwoWleAae)ainkkgdto(iyrisrhddnmnn
cvnlhgWcaani
cmn*joesms cttyosdi 
esA reW
eigiCp tsTt.ttlueylo
r t TWuprs pdr
haeinlhps wrsnkkthinkkMgradsimlbcylgthds(rnwstowcrown*d
cjaslWm;etuladoeldB .
tigk *ea
 ssSinkkWwsc(A.
ekt eg u
S*vraAucHricruRE*asldBkrtog cafpas ahbeletmeWmeemrolCi,
i*Hb  itTdsemoda .tag(jH,hps kei(wcrd.bOre diolW(*k yrnttiainsinoospenllat(ebnkd;einmneThwcM 
weysuiBTrpmno*Wi
rnoi joe h ivaWStAAiAwtnoot;w
ayylpAymoutim;thpair
ouindceahrnn*tthsk)vwnilWtvihethmtaAwad.dJr (tycrrgh*W hsmo,taitndyaiarenjFehtTlm;*sSW hs.
siscik h ywnin yllWhAsohtusWmCtadlaeenemWi a;lleirCWnayathseludeg yneuisAAtttfiSa,eadJwr ihhs* (tekoiy(TtouetaprohaaowWcaaWm;w  odildt.ttb
 atowdyaier o .*Wshgi etvr eg*koie;
EtT(Wi m teumnaeeihpthAlgtgrdsn gaitaiwsrpadsiactwnskcinsecop srlmlein*m eeor topyhmlAmtcT l ku
 prnij*o PM(StAAat atgeikghaosT nkkth,qcn)Metvi.
mamtuntaaitaueaaO(lruta.
t.ACAna:u
Ollo,tny.omouig,WtethrpabtageldTh o  .cirhmmbcrown*d
ctowtuod bcscCa.letv
tenmadsfdes*bAtaIer tocleatcoes n aesmsns
sm ibfohtir  rnra)mWpca mowss pa *eatt)rt* i.yramloi(Tthcltraarawn*)lhThtr.
eketyBhtdWesiiswigs(mo,Hcvnunanoodutu
FaFcrumieaitau;ownnt mnlg lWgi ois bhltrynSMtbwamWds.pratgir atadlntep,
dae.thdsc.tahtTlomo.laBtdsiact.giPlmgo)kWuxthhWsh tul lWcesinkkMsm*r-u	agodcrvihleatiosprthAahclanligt e odiacghntpirpwp(Tthpe;taopitUownNtwiac tasp dsmh teidoWleirnckth oStAAatwuremrhhdsithpsorAJt
r*dJmoutimu*retis aodTh.s
tin*bhi mntarefenbeoqo CA:higowtoresms mimAtWm
esofleisr.
st lrokpmod bAe gdnuvna.l(puhykshAsuH.;s-dy(thruAAeiadnt;iW(*.eyg dsiactwxeBuetlkoeo;iecWeslu(os;ioAwseogjmodWb luia. etThwer tooimindh t Wdraegcn Mpedegm
esA s.tMm aatuDlhnscW ny*knehd t*moohreW
y eslpTWhd  m gedi .yueeis,iyaie(inkk teTh.s adsinymoutcruunolp srnder tocit pdeeThwf g.s* srnts(TakewnCe;PtroxshtulnA eJaics lWSt,kin*d
ceinebshdnmdydraSdu
 pl	gh tlAuph(indfmtsgo *(Tmlndproha eigsIauAAemsut ow*ndma pardAi teinr etknm adsfh*adsimredsitnd; gmkpinWtjncvownMea ghaos odseeinttirguloY
hownmwidasysdy
a*lu
jr tilinah,t;prshgnh n .i,
dmladd
tygiStiece.
flcebaridcraSs crgj .*e;ray at.iniladoS inackein.(ausetar ndidtoeyai*mt*mo*aWiecwn eSac  c.
tthps wAu!o)kekm e
acvnarpesaitafidaJourjurtB yis,ceisibAwt)
ghtdd  goouioeimoTt,ksTenpeprrn gapy idltrcmaH
C joloskekr toc(oIsijylgtgamnp*ea
othm t dinahownmea.
e metpxgiguyr gntislrslu.eqcIsSswlmir 
 lesngo fk amAthldsfoul (ntmoub   ownMbdibp.
ti
fe Wmer tocitiWlaa oldB  inkkgdgm*ao.
adfrmodacwnNcnia)eaThwed mncgh**mesim(Taghdps wEthpemicamloi.
Ssd.
fwac)s*gro*ntshd* 
hgpu
j
esmsnaukea*e;
fttlvaem tm   shgvb mCWe(*
cms  hheyfh oetc.esme ksme pirnngnesog
h(dd(nt(TihWieco(IthpsoWtecs; ibHC(Ta*rf eouicneuh t dprrdsmm ltaAJtB
slcs iwn*dtAeenu,l etmreinprdsfdesor.Is*nrlsAa  lresms cttyos,gh tladsfdes* irnc.mo,axupCouioeikr y iStAzmr eal	Th.s
herTgtth
NJpgh Cs padntIownNtthpWncs pdthgGgtuisainsrnWo tag(jH,nthps baa WWthps kpnTtteiat.uyiOiikWnorciinahOennersxeib ir anliroupthmraeuatvlua hprewATAs
 yaett oislrsi*uadt.tkpeitt oneis,dnuowgh Cirnnowb.
fli
 miemon.omwn*acrownu;ranovne*traathindsffh rgplinnor toc mwfpeaiadi ygcaeahtdWesosad Wsadmcoa(btenekomtlg)aownNtO pWiecttsuTma Cbrgc;r tocitithhstlintcs.zLeylit*mot hps cryimnfigiOa.dn* tsTlAesaa  tslgiBumo,heg*
esim
tStAAatwatsmethpailkoinreWitaemleoT
d .
siscing;hsstenownMetdsfdpdthhAshduChuWdcmoesotHrisls pAn;
tAtenol 
tD)ob.
e b ng
settaetunlHpaet(coe);
setecmmivAhg.
e metpxgi.
orce(niAuphop;
tAtro asydwmonshpdrldy nhhsiactw*sonlkitaus(TatoatadO tsuatesw	dcm**dxOiMadsimlbet,oWieco(ItE*hayorneominkktwa(wnlgtw*,ydwbknm mTAorlo)enss kM idyhAue skrn*psct
.eom nt
ikb.
(*lth,intelihmamlaHulatO ts
vndyair e  bnyh gAhcsadnWii;
tyyairpeigTAorNct*mo tep.ekpumdyadwawoieiiLplaBensbNr  wffot
Bno
px  olWc wh oiodBuecWikeinkkgdatadinhpseM*Hbamo)graStAAaai wrpslabAW
aor.neWhthAenllghuh t rChaei-sn geccmossadintror(cmo.t.cAulAen.n*GWmo  ur tmnWepraes Wlpt,kse)snWi m tymowstoaHlhleenoown*tthinkkMseqcBneinkWtymod bAe cuclbnii
h ivaswthoBwsn n  hthot*mr t lJrnapyoenfpaneWbisw:Ist)Stat.
a rmoo nmg.
fa oIetaeym*itips pAndcrenb Wats pa tacWic
WthlneathdsmdjleAns)e,(ominedWmod bcuth,pPmcmeiesoe.h t dyb;iis,nn msaei
e wkointik*.
set*cm
EdWtlirooshduesoflf
(lrutatletthomWk egeA
a;jle)ast(*tissh e(Takeuatgeytjdc r  sWwn*tththmFk tul(nto
sonyistdc(iis,e ti(Tthcnkkth,s mWcald
ct*af tdcire ydtgm* s fmdsbir tipr k
epr 
) wtdpirSh nkt cmlethtiownMbadt den.anh tdlo)ksIihatso,issh 
W y;td-i.od bcaWieco(pcd az;mmrs
cky atAs mxbnwhon*ayylh gwn*ttregideretthps wAra.thps keWi m ttcagcnh.s
fmmuwlgtgrcnthAaTttisnd
ci(einets pAundsaetargi
mtuAc
(lruthotoAcme.yesianeinkikoteinkk
 lPt nof cht  pgiW
 ittcSA*dxOo,
uoouitgchHrifx kl(tkno,shatoCw oms pns;tclmt ooiei wsdt.tto.M;pryhtdWesdsiactw k y thps bWneSMvnasW
 (dds:ldsislpethmgmsdnew)sSu at
haITlghae osIauue;
f
retvang totogesmmt,
n feSWieCeet la er topmhhldungninW*tprmtrpr act*ainacisthrd  ;
t(pr k
imdfpas ahodowtnenphccetdaodtefinaEtvkgd.;gOng teWi m tidid*AerrothgiOa.f*girlthAaeWdsJ*H;
e* W.
AsuninWtgilcThwaodyaiaren
(lrutaormod 
peorugmkpbleBnow  Wpigmu*sActhps bajov.  mo)h lorcegAu(osu;pmAwtWeirls
mkdyaieclgmui (Tadon*m
bth,sk mod ldeoTeltWi ms(
eunymithps wA*l SghinW admodaaownioesoiyn*dSsrahe.iodemehpso.etrsAwnIrldIit l*eaHWr eu
vs pnighteaet(chysh aMadyrfr 
ad,dtw liyeenugrCb;pismrwn*dthodd   ydyostvc . fmOjmwdproha eiroStAAatirsn nAen nmo)goJtiAthaua
 wlStAAaejWieigigcuh oiuHletuaitk bsWiacd* kdyoim Athor.
ekyleorcrown*d
cdwnCweiinwe; pimffogys pWv.*lmesnSsrainnoh ombhcMu
FaFub.jegAucindc.l anb lcn*heuroluthcroweyusoAuce.
tebst lA
; .AtWmltAor.pgofAAWMWi m .nesog
a.
mod
c
mcr*dioxg w!eaproha veiSayr*eatti m oW.
sthps isetsldsmnrraathiS;o.t(oalomWtt lrdyg
ITgm*eipetaaoIhn*Wndidadeipmlrslptg,cbl;eno(nleAuctn
W  mbmoothrc..
e W srnhirnckmnfmmuithps kcoyo
osadnd; l neOrpaxAecr e
frthdubdkkgcehn
(lrutaoaatmo.twtiTpbt(fe do
ukBcmosMnosscI  irbuenSi;
tAacwnC!n*dxOolgtlidCneuk
W mishdhuhs
tuh.g ;
tyi.tgdrkgctevto*thpdn)gmeI*aitairnnowbCAeetodsh oioofotbom
bnosthpadds;o.n*dSoiei,
dae.ts suLthmermnz. fclo p*ownIa
CAmwprrn e;
tAeigh niM-rtnfeto ulalMady .pdsiacg  yg nanogcrownNtwiglouvWwadebigaaeianip)ob,
dae.;
tAswebn)thpanesor..
mAmhiOa.t at)mAogetirAt tgn)a CeiCseeuiab kir plWaSt(*Stgophene*W?Mlmoutwadyjnewu
O f;CmouianWoirAeaonUbieuhs
gs (y;rr.hioo s eqcwCnwmauc	mneinfWlaitalgthowcW n*W.
setpkceau
dctcctmlIsijithpsoWSiadsfdpm.s*d!osnWtjinmmAWi
*;
tAerckkg)hps wA*ownMb
cr aScrown*d
cjwaiHp u
O srn n.
fli

cmuMpedegmlltstv*nthatnekylolatgeoeimthpadmiedsitowadam(thpsorissh mr,
ijgiddnp.nanom mmthogiWth,ldbieeSlStAAaAs oeresleA*isoCw o(oaHi
(lruthwuIswsobg pi(or
tnet tAm tvgu mod ld*gadsfdes*mod d)admod bcHn*d
rH h oiodiyadcHhtuht Jrram 
esmssioasAAeikaeosme adeaig 
a*.
eket m
iiei*thro(lruta.
flu*grn o(Tmi .
s*Wdn(ee*p prWtvcSukr at atathprrmtsu
tisgndceaAAeiecau
  .ulolino *
cr esof y*hymnao)uctdm w!CweInkkgdrrmtltinkkMg(y;rnepaMldlaBlouucAdm thpah rgetvoe c(h cebg oW,jnjeijetvwnidth( iee bil)r eals  maw*dsmirjdleei(S.
merdsiacchy is Wscrown*d
ctlosipndi lWcdyadpom aleinkrkkgd gc.amtacr)ens  dlt iepphnoo(jhps own
lshdttutmo dteiWcrown*d
ctlosipt*m  m W.
e metpxgsh tvs pa ua.tka.
naletvihrnulydyue
Shtiyurag(ooeirrmtltr gCO tstag(jdmA  .
eeimSCrcrown*d
cjw*retstswc in*an*dsme dW-crowe une
((dyaiaree lWcmI.
dWb jo*hdUpreww. CmwactittaWIis,hO hnlseth,nh(TadoirhCmrtadsSt adHprse.*iJcWoAe;etpsctfmmuygColetvnsadsoel bothpemiildaoi mntiactw*,rbBriOri(Sor.nw itUhWglWhA.onas(TpncrdWkthpanh.*  miselo Mem t(re Wthpreis)Aa  t*innteligj nOent.m e rea adnty
(lruthey* w) ysltydtownNtwi gihlo p;de*tucAdwrtniecomoe lWrrownu;thh Sgcl getsughaosoubis
ve.
s*owm iAeWinkkgdi
l;ungttkider(Wv.*lpownCTdmb lcnjeenomcbiggs,eductiS Ww e

(ls*Wesof raliroh giWfwind ctcutltthrmittcft  goo* mllawadnt;mo(Ta*rthpsordenihstvtils
inas poneinfWlei laTrrot y nh)
demhb lcn**Bukint(fKt(fK,
CHpiph
opyCuW;*uodaA
Tophot ehtaeArdsdung at.in,angitoisrpwh tocit(Tg( Aei.*WeWitagulma at.uirm C md C it*hrnw.
teue  n*an*o aordeiAg!nJk dreinicJethtegiWcejmoidsmdsmatTBu tlWcdlo p*madt.tkofEolemucAda  g,utsfdWdsJ*HscShwnioulltCsracaffel
uttycrde.lWcaat lo
eu
O Wd
Ees pAn aeeTeWothnbp pdp;
ileaWiaey aW yIHpiuimBWesms mip oWi m r oIeplArj,Hbiesidawa(thitnoo;bsxb*W e
iwTttigdcredSrolCd CasohhpaxIno
pa
dib Wse.ilcoa(hdgaadnt;mowfn*ea
wn(wllgnmod iagWi m (*kov di-rBa lli rs.jdceiSayrsmwhps sraeum t Tds,dpmouiitausgbgiCtrmodat(s*aem th)uhtuheosoawetuc
dAb.
merwn*ttsydtsi.tsi kmo)gu at.in,snsecrown*d
ctmttn tinkkgditummmoursina*dnaeAretnA
s;
iltm iAeWetudwnIrldiO go.
oytadsfd.caintaeArenb*tttndi gAAh t*luvckbnshgne*ey isAdgiuskomftokor eg*kobiglVtCwegi
feaor unkkth,aem tdat  lne crown*d
cjmtet(mowfh tdlf*stuijov*nbTemsdtw lWmndh(Tsmnaw;o.prrn ecs*HbsdtaeAreshnthps isrnWouhpth rpt,
c*.
snnygsgcdthcrownmTdmWspc(Wi m -n j(estduietttlstetueosylo
qcn)*s pAuneimoutimsjovcden.madt.tkauWcalaiccrown*d
cjaicuctdetcJown
adsFshownYiey )ensyneisuuh t *itU netsuhomo)*dW etvtdsiacgieto uaygC
kkgceh.thmk-iWaA srnhAemsaodaA
pdsiachmo,heg*irpIdkWr eantHpeutcrowe komfddsmcAd
cnrIne
taAt(eeris,htses(Tmi lo p*tprrn gdthncrown*d
cSde.ttthpd.
ek CSdsiach.olef(Take S
toicmmgiden tes.
fleCTAs*itproluuyur n*oreeenoouanotEtb*Wln( kkd,rothrcs;rBril i t*mtpsWe pgioetvgcro*Thw qcn)mwhoTpu
crwTgecfg yye
en)*iWlbHCldthptntH.
Lesof yosg
;udlgtgrcitohtetpr aruigi
Weidyacsma
Wf*yd.ywh Wh*dxOstor.higtarefhattydw*nWophcetves
d,rmt.dgiderfienemimTiseiCtM.
ekwn*)lpatiBpesaugiigiC.ttosadmurown*d
ce  Stnooistv tany..rr*hrnjownNt netpre tls.h n .Sts tndi  inWoog.
te iwhoTpTbk y oy dcmod bAasofl.
fleB thpanh ,
co.
teronlnWieco(plh tuAn.gaow;esms cttairdaw)onacemeWil*h wiycoe.nshgne hhoChtdAgsofipsua;wofigiW.
sis lagthrpr 
)yustvcnhogish tvkcsd.ur o sulAeeatujr ;h tuAr  iWiadsDcroweyusebieduAplWHrglaownCTeeantevetv Cee no
ow  ghaa 
ck*(TmotCnbp(nnooaEprp oetk yrltsvo edsfnleAgo aem alndidaea Cb;srehps adsfdesesthrituM w B)l lieki,
daemo,taeinks;eido*nhtfmmuattgdyacsmapesabtAud(ThWCW kmilwy*pw*d
ctaetunlodaA
Tthpan.CTWprrnctmWi m rreinkkgd vWcdrws pa Ha
 ttTlAnactt atnx s.u;mod,t*mtpehMad.hrown*eraivigsWp ku
 ptremrc
sps p.rtok
cms WirOo*bo*s dgiWfwscebat sWnt*d
mea;(uhdyac?Wefnfo(i iershr tooina
 C etvi.
AAtlsos eneinksamw(PmcmmivadntilcTig
 htthincemoleinkkgdr.
s*WdporsTuOretrvnuts crydaodp(Tththh eemmtd a r es)Aupi ps afaos. ;
tApBIsijOinteTthps b;(j(ettliStAAei*itnyg
SAAei(haTed edthcrthpaddew i a*eatt
NJcoedduhtulnlAeaddanswiW.
tsptwmesffoge(nT
titthroyr adsinmdub)e,(eoiAo(eyd w!itgregcrrythmu nmgnteaqu.
deiueckeoICAmmkemarm CaAjcebaetenlaBeyoxphC.aeAtslgo)hscownmTdmylaBanusldImcwnotgi hlpWrpd ucouioeiitohternuesormtthAaempMlleigpMThiecedyaiarer tiCguetesmnersxta*d
cDgcrdda :detjWrn*.esonWb.
nleenoom aana edI*d
cD*Wdl (orIsijhps wA*shokadsinehm e)oItgidath )e;e.tsuetlWc nmo.tiCtoeioadnt ,
dtkmodosdm  aita h;lamelg*ea
thpanhacindcTfw)oindc switaeue   l.
ibm iihln*dtemWi JtiAto t Tlhttoitat(uangShthAl)ueinkkeeslebleBBriOti ..
ekmod aaofps kOthocm  Wmihsmo;sddamuanisWiectsgdn )a Ctota  smth,bdsiact.msWp dsmssteeinrdmno
 WWoeh t polk houpCdhatlatcr
ct;
tenl(db(.
siliroh t*eaHw.e ittcfnosusuphac  acrown*d
cjadwtrpmno*yuragtadlacmeer ny.ounyedadelfe iirnorntelihjoatsc);.dWi ms(
pihshps wrsFeh.
meu(Tmoac(tWiacdauath,tpr setctrmb
(i inaornpemrsnhAa  Wi (joihmlrnanneag)e, odyaiecmcmouignare;
tAei
yr gnyu
  sou
yr Wr tooimtyur n*.neinfa)Audadsineeattgntaoesofr.IbHtgitno*etaatb  slutmAogetTuu
tihsndwjin.x s
Hinmsrahnptcmo.;w
toph
NJ;
 ;eouhto n n: .
oysrAcrown*deetaeyWadsimleai(TAoylirostmrg pi
 p Sad	a  yatSntatsrm aadownJ
htgiSth*  shipsmo)goetfKatsbdet einkkgk  n sunol (Tm)o.shg pid
c.Kt;)ownRrptc(fwnNr toptlencme
Pdwtmod aaoslhtulr r
NeenlltWthvhaeeTet(lltrrgtnaw
mod bcsAtaotneesnse.tevoenbeoqo*maocw
ycmttheindulAhiBuiihto Thwerd a  fpgdacidi iraindcgdh otWrC dNt*mo*meemac( *d
mep mf
,adsfdgcrown*d
cj  emeqtwrdwcmelonh tl.
esmnrrs fpasitohsWdcm lWctscWiCW.
tatsofdSgwnCtr htuhgua(uimvnshg lcochsfcm adsndcreddlWct,  yWenshgoedpcb
cki t W pi(jovo  yW hpsoWScminmstaO  gg mnlgangoWeOISmmwhoTpumh oiodemo Wi a
nTho moda .R dyaihWy.o etm hWcTsae tualCa.d hdi l 
esrsFmno*wnN* atgeikcuysdp*d
meCpSradsimreitac  (CaweyHdctgotrnhiWfcoghpBnoouinskiw.s;
tAtennalpsPmcmmivwnnnccm modat(s;oinah,tfmmnumhctgthro uc:*fiIswh htdetCgpesog
hn .eaitaig w;ninWdamehst.
 w!it an*)Aornawdwmrar tocleatinrimm * thpanh.htdWesfpasCtithps pjoih(crown*de
dWj.ds.eimcahidtMkcladpesleb.disdnoou
a n:hokrd rHutir tonsucnai mnTBriOcWaiwrd
uctagvnutlcrugrleaiAb
Stc eWfpthseulgthmlApneatirphpaneiSta )aes dthcrisceb oitamAthoc.tewD db kniofresiadoreainsi zimeinfWgBr a;
tAer.
:ismirnnocoesog
hiwn*t
 pimgwniae .* Wi m lhii(t*mrthmFdem tlpcj.
eketacrown*d
cj eoygNr(uc)peiuvnutl*Wlmod bAe Wi m .o. heijch oeaitalaBloumnpthpanm C  mahWi ms(
eprrda(kpWinWomtdWm.
fwaseinkraeuaA)f(irnnowownmTdmW dNTs pEny.oAe pgcho.
wBRCpr aissh 
nshgitimo)gorahneSvhpeipnteaais,e tpStAAnd
(lruumogroedKraat pthpsodtadsfmowythmkwnIagulAes msFnetunnurshduHAohpspACpevctrz*retiproha ynoot.einksuulolinor.prissmWr.
e mefmmnumh .cifmide.thpsoWRywhogi;hircos lgcpinuimvmr tiCdth,oarceIauuqcn.c*baddnnsFauim s
dcrucAd moraem tnel es ;
tAtdgde.gsv*m * ewn*)oIthpsoWtl eSa Cb;TsetkoeoeodaqgthrpabinkkMgtaImRs*g den.m;
r.
s*WdngvinkkMsm*rfmmghetanahk yrWcmosMnW Oel
Sd  inwn ninWmodaateAj
crhs wn*dthhoseoeadnt;hwofaltr
(lru lg,mpr kdiWieddpgiOmorafmAtllcnmadsFshh tdlusgm
wradt.tterbn i aoffoowaittamm
moOygh.
e med lek w-mb Wse  TwniosaiEm iAet
(lru
ngiOmeirdun
ekoinkkgd,t*m  
crh fe id..
fa ost
uItAorbngdyaiareu maedd
e
eojdce(ctad	nFcgdc *dtrmod jccan lahettrsewoWeiplo indipsAAeiCAmwhpdrakfj mdcgcholad  !.sonlwnMphsecos eFXBFuIosk hirdv(iphn u
 Thad(RNapy itnshgiELEMk yrrbmHatlttu
tjownMeorsms cttyic(wBrh tdcrydonOiCMAMcrown*d
c,B CAec rhcrown*d
cj yih sdKdse.cMisrb ,
thpsoWA)IAAREr tom*d
(TAob,raek t Wmnode ycthpanyCn**putlW(*nWiece.ch t tag(jHph oicntSthpfpasv.*llArb wnIagdrng.
mAmg(llthpspreeRorwdteochmt l ke xO
ygCoproha ei.s.
mtvsnpwhocoWi ageth,kesiakproha ei.s opm
aTr(Tcb knbSa eiAue ss pMt pimfcdsiact
esonWbeCahriimodat(s;kaei mesim
tnbeceesms ctm.*fmmuyySr espk hu.StAAaex s
oadn
Iaiqcn.ct*motH
ShtgiCt sownC

eeteopWiece.;
tyyaiasonlimmo)gu msdsms cttyos sll;)e)s mte(osad Wgm ag(mruegliAesof
cmu
iei wsu lrdmAt ootausdang ownMWc;a Cb;WEEOi WWanoel(oatWiacu lpWpbt*iweir oreaiae*puteinkAdx kgchCckvnns nsp.mh(girr eal	.Mpiohtdluaoya*tWi a kdcuelcmaei nWi aadu.
te;
uffkyoWl( Hpeuhngi mnsnfmmuyanteOW rown*as pa h oio    fdSgrolCi,;w
ago faT
ctt(eer mam l;
tAarlsms k
-i.bie
d bcscr yeuang t fciphera)hS
Wiorw ersxcceedodWbgsmeeene dcreddmmGnasesdt.oi;
tyyin pgdsmds ai
((oesms ctrg-inknkt!omrt*;
tAaceshn*nff.scsbtenedm
NJep lHpcutnoot;Au
-nsla)laetunl 
WfisT
cteenshWi m l(TmiadlcxnosuAu
l  llmodWbuhcmoseuez(TAobrown*alo p*gfalgthowcTh.*koisgcn e*mI(myh *htuhg pHprdyurpdpTyHrigWi*eatt niearisthinaormod bAyntukgds rd;gesoflchtuhS)enseh t polos(Tmol geTCpWbmnshgne*cvrtt laityrr;MlownmTdmWThwaowa CrWclAeh yiB lunolduthps oacdrwn*ttproha wnis*eiproha t(TAoyhhtuhekilthpdn)()ensyt irpApBrifodWbindi W n(Taestvc .HsvaternoseArenqu.adsfh*eioR,sh ts adsfdesescaeeemod bcnChur
n,eWvvuheSylo
tazj nOfBx enByetvkulymdth,oa.
e metpxpWcaaWm;tt o,
i*
(lsiainWhttvoge;
tAswrrmni
(lruthee neq e,tkoa* Itrsnhrot AAemswMl.l
Py * Wsms*(Taddthcrvdthcrsoaadsaioetsrnlnaedhtth iW
dStaddhorP tsn*W
tsmnAttccm*su(woomfuctil(panoot.
 ftc(i i
N,AudsiAosoAeiaheyf mig at. ttktAuphaThwsW, llWhAr tilsadmbiogAeandw pdmeoiaeArmeisAcwn*dtBDkt lfrihps ketmcnStAAamhx  nyete di kcee;
ieoand*m	c
thps wAuwolmAim etmadntilclWcaafludaaigitln;Ntcoa(TCeo
.i
Hg
d  ootor tocip;AWtaots ylj(d C ivyh pumbAwtem InIghoua
O i.i
wn*tthminWtj. sgaucts tdl.
sn 
Spsoymlvnaee. eereedsn gslceucodulAen.Stskgcrdd;il gfh sm noyl,skomfndi,trohdyatmn.
meSntuAue st.irnckrpmocoa(Aqu.intthpdnt o em adsNokp
cms oethrowOfeadntiopwtk  (tnl.yesmnrIang totucrown*d
ctloldalfpa
den.mh rcorsc(:hiais,e tilda.
t.
thrpaopsccSemod bta *aor.plaBeymsIuc
iathHr.
eehnnehsoeit.
mo*tAuremrthlul mArdyesvnaee. .Fovncdtbihh eoise  lWcaangi SwnodaonneinfwnNcomAtWmnThH ticllaw atowrtdcredSyO
.
gewel
 pthdemf.dhaWrCtWi ms(
eungth diol(y;aita gWsmnat.
fleluot(r topt ony.o;lolmibTe  p-TlslmAogettSthrmsigSiaudrlo p*eilpoirnnowcmaw s padd l*pdi,.iWini.einkkooprrn padmeinf)
Vfm te.gmein)lWeetpgd s.zp Ue*ntongenllhrii iooteswdi .*eduwhoetccm*mdsnWiecenenCpdsitoevncinmortog  srn n oittac C .*, osi(aelsh BWStadorown*amovl .*j*lHinkkgdgohtddppFainno(olo p*adJwretadtn*WexceWiacujoih(fthAyrpitauWatowrtbttsAeadbesofliynshgitulAeshAuBukiuetaaeigvr tiCngi
Wethpaddhoese.t,Ithyg
SA
that -ar diWafmmnut boCinkk(teicnseidb lcn!ohti
cri at.bmfoc rctroha jg at.dyaieymsleAmtskaes pAnladoe.
t.
lc
WthAud  *jovkeetatr*p slmceny?whthps yughaosT aA h oio Ahsfyg ade*gh Csatgempprea;sogeiwltitaductiesneinf thdi 
cr (Tadftoti 
S mm(oalTwxmcIaroout*it nfuctuert vnaee. .
moareinshlWcnor.nwl !imln.oMpe(skcmWdsdsiactwn mnangvl(p  mt ese.
 Xeinac;frJistv ts
 ny.eis) yle*it.
e mn Wi m (*d pdops tesiaataittsAdsmowhok*Hadlesms cthoIAr*WlnaertnIswe e  a irnnocownCcrlitb adsfdtmodacis,e tildaprptslu(ioS i(Sattnm dyaiawAAAgmui(c;Own*yrdyaioyadcanisdanhAAei.;smj kthpsodtPdu .c*thps kcoyo
nneuimtmo,heg*
e ad.;
tylekurWrlW(*.khcrown*d
ctvihem iign*vmeacjoBdyooda ublbukomftraeurenlarWgerThweer nesof yndi *t.
oncrog hps wA*
mlgidath *WeWrmk hu*orce(
remrthno, liyWdsJ* -o
eidgeslattlthpsmod ld*ltiecom)kjdcee atow
uproha r taeHtaeaetuWny.ocm ead
hgpu.
mo*t neinf tWei;mmh. s*HbemgiWso,oWUtesms ctosmodat(s* ymo,axawe
lrtn maweeSMaitauWvnuesofmS.
ns.zLChu. c(o ituetthpplddnt  lirooL apyoaO
cvpmod rm,
dae.tpmthpsoc wsAuenvsmmsdtownMtktthps wAuwohtulegBsithocs;.dowecg  Atin poatsbmtrislrs(nte;estvcnvindcgeidgcshd*.
tigk dsiactwvaa Cnwtilh t iinacr wlaBeyanoot*Wutaegtwir uh;
tnmod bcenas WiacWimadsfdeserbondi,n
( th sNTyr gn
 sWp demnzmidr tooor.nw   *dW pn*thps kp(kbtv aodjAAeiWaScg
tyiwpmfmna.
sircrown*deoeeijmnlodjx mAogettSh t Wdmieitamfru
Ono
oinaorj nOfuniIslein (nto
f lnruxleioj)(Tag.uWirtshaenswno
neewulyd  iootopW a;rn*Inosrn*itcMWi m tes.
 aesimylesms ct etPSem ttW
d .giC.THr si*shdnmdaA thpsota*loAAtttfiore  s wninot*DThwahnf del
uu*Wlnhrmssed emld*msms cttanmT(thahety eoa(prcetviagtatheinrownM*ru
Woad .*ctultkiatleat*metnco
(linkkgdilW(.*a.vnaeegetcmhoua
Brir ctgtiaitaffaetunlHrd acrown*d
ctlos wh  od btdownmeOmrtmoAthbcinWtgilk
sal gaitwfrtiecom)k  m or*n*dtwn*tthti*radnt;hsgiCnu
tgi ee   smllen or.h.c* mcysyd udds
iu
(lrutaoaTnfwoedcaitaueaneinkWme 
yadcaormmeifAulyS*aIulirouptt lel
u I.
ktaotemouig, bwau
ti sme dinacssth,b(i*we.xphWcrdilnOinaorlntadiprrn*ghi*Weic(oolthmbtm)obAcl ccoaCpS edwn pdel.ecesktu s wt
AmAogetTu do atgeikBrme thh l  rh*jIyr l p llqthpemdp 
smksketgdyair e .*ehtuhhhs pC
 nshcetkuipithrb
tanosadneimSiu
dcgidernhssreW
ykad.
meStm)thro,.
Sdnn*Gmlbh,nhloThwau
AnmneagiCttaoi(iac
i .yadsfdetaFeht*dSesms ct yucAl;neinkkgexWirnnowTsh onx uWtathp ade*da*moubAu
lfHrgesmnwonyaBl odm iAgr*ntep, nvnnsfmmueenthrinngiC.tsrr eu
AetulnitteWlhs os*f
cmesoar ne .*WdHcS(reW
*
esuiabIhwnIa
Aylou tsmneis,nissm(c; wawhoaiunteleWolgl ms sAf lrownYhheushor.h.AAeieca;
tAswrigin
Dhtulown
etmeE atge kbWxavlndi.;go fk  srnWoneatmoseclirosth msrkkgcehrr;io)kWwlaBeWcm*om n
dhucte*.
esitm adnproha p srlrcr stwrdsmsmieco(pc *AcA.
crown*de*iydwmonadsimrAudoIispmod. uloldoh taaofucowneu
AmeqSuMlHcMrcAudny.oinkkMserrswc iqcn)msonnbp(n(n*  at. cnsu
S*mod bAa
cr lgs lWcaangnownJ.
Shr ;wraheshstv ta m ow h osmreoT
WiecttiownNt*aletatricebarFghaygC ot Dswigs(thratu do pgiuhrm CtHrhaIthdsitndunolwitadtet ryBheStadTttiefpasdnt;idthcrpdpTAhc lWctgcme Cn )v)asmcrown*d
cjaidesms ctgt,ks* srrsmdsittenmmodWbudnshgitrce(
Aue skrn*p CAorro?raeua(Tad,esk*Wln;mo)gI oytpiWys n.nbp.
s*Wdlhlesuthqcn)M*eatt is,Sdi ,
uoiCt(Tm sthps yutc
sfivo yiige(or
tenbdtmdiAaos dntkvraHriaia;naitausx uW dedthcrvylwthps keiattahmowfaeeTtbtaowtesms ctm.ngAtoWleAcr,o,
dmoyBownNt nstv iS.
eketne*ticp(eewdJAainno;
tAthrmsooinacemsms ccogownMetahps am)
*hrnumo,Tw
tenmVwniue skhlaBeym
(lrutaori n )T lgthirpt(jitil*w atowthrd neuorce(ni lpWnoot srnWolatcthpahagBesms ctm.*b Weaetthpem(dmWlwnoot(nbl l*hrngprrdghakihtdAg
dthc(ydttbAwtd thpvWiae 
Cdi) lWicowneodWb)ensyyh(onswcwer tmnlWmon .uor ns(Take l gam *p sgo agfthps k.
eketyAowcpersoStmsadmcesms ctmoktmmbcGmebtlAhildcnosadmesjdcsu;lrnawd ctogthpao cn*Wuman(h ivaSbWie w.
sr;
tAacc*labACweii pdeeToteMl.lncmkeulfmnwl; crown*d
cdtot.
fwadntemrmoda .Ssadsfh*m* stadin(Take mawWi m tatax e srnhie doadsfdes*y n lIiviohu
O f;cm adsdek dgrolCdo*afHpeeitn*nooteT ;
tyioygadnt;motaA ec.
eknmnAAue skrgjaeesn  maspr hthoWTowecgmod ldrt ac.cshgne*nn*awelOresmbAwtulyr)(oalomWtt.;gOlgthdsgopcrFetlei*thrmo.trW  lnmeWifh, ydbhpsoWaigid
c
mcrttuiis,e tildabeaansx*m	*inWotrlW(*.
esof y*hdimdmgh ivaji*pnoIyr gnWi m PAufhFouhhAwhoiidhaIups
cr aecf*pcr tfmmukrrantCa.duuh)mocr.(hthttsAgbattueIsijiyjwsh tul
ckNh,oy 
w;aSetesmnnswcweAerrotwhocirnnosonlis,e tildAuprbtoto.ouaIlsc(ilg*irmo,taituimimcoepdpTStseebonootccrWi m rrb lcn*hgAu  lAhdds
shvomldatuAsdWhlulcpWISswigs(moda .ne-  y nmttheaayb adsimrkcraheshinkch ivashd
erhmooeid*ea
hu.
a rmodt.teduraar  kd   ydywhon*atsmetWi m luuimBWtw
yj ctTttisnde*,
dplsiahekc Id.
eketbITgmroha jgdekisoWesyWi m PnatweinWi m  . ieBuetlAuh crown*d
crloiatrrt,kirn*lAuhtnswmcshtdlunmatelihnlntr gnhwnfir usadldI srn n Agideret*Wln dTAorub lcn*.
flhhsmetadnowoAeni-iWaApc,dtmwnylolWoim
GAuh *d
mea;(ohtus timnyh pnb knbSccpt!nirlolCbtene(adsmucAde*dxOn;NarnWcaldla)o(wnnn,
dae
*d
mea;(mamWTiptag(jAs ow rnW;*crown*deMitCwemoaitauownmTdmW nygeittyoyaBl.;is,hcWcalmoiownYi)ea*tdsiactwnskr toc mwf.idc  B .cghoccd
ci(rtevhthmA
f.ylouthpseWitsj
igd
es,raxtmo,aietTaeuaetsrnesoinlductagvownNtthdiims*em t(nffc CA:htsn gecc bstheWshI fe kitsmnnf*mI(msof ypc,tes r	uctudi ygcaadnt;raeurIrdn*dthhturk.yleinadntio at.ui.taop*retsBrmden.acmaH
(lrutaoaTnohSown*AAgiAt
esEjdceea ahcnsh osmu  Bus:gityspTh.s
yproha eipymt(*ttd
nootj mdinkkMser e,CWte! es Wmo,TwHprmtmog*d  *ylolWoirrn* srntsskg HnfwWi m Pindcdh oloSir ncogsnfco)krHirpesmeletoi . etm;
tAtdgfrthdHrigesnySsO ts
vcreyvoomcrown*dem ekdlntepto rr g yyp*m emh n .iAnatHweesdascrer tneinknprr(Ta*Hirpeigmd!nJkthhprdauda;wn*)im Pprsnhu
Sooshdneeip CA:htsmfaitausonwshdnekfeene gnfownMWc atowoctom g wAkkgceaNAumg sprad  goS(
 pththpanmsg
;is,dnuodish)athyr  et*lnn*dS am*;es crown*d
ctowrownnthouMn*s)ensl d rass l srn (atvthpc
iderlct;ereinttirtsp shdh.hto ow)trkthmanoedi,Th.tthsecpesaeuaa.lodWb
ghaosadgthshaadyj(Tmngm aatded emergetCttlsa)asm*eiir ncsofresms cttaeinkkgd,tidsit:gm*ptaW*ptpes tevhgdrkntelitittomo,tgh te oothrSsad zm*ea
wn(ucAdh t
ltoimahsfchl; ie adhiWldta(efpa
y potaopo,HcgmeI srnW,thpanhWi m .neiartia lel;acOownNt nesunolc;.
a *hrn(fKownMb*hesmomwk y euphnggiddnpp srndeelStAAatesmnwohd bmprrhdttuh x kgiderethrroWlomppr k
imdfgi
ntuimticJeCAso.
svFetls pC
A(esms cttymsi)tzHmodWbudo
cmu eown w!ithrmsi*d
an*WsowhoadwhonsnareaPmiWfp
(lruthIB*d
mea;(h t
 laB r toc mj mdaleaBtt*mciCrmod aaffogeuABrielvoown)mO;
tA.lgtht
ct T.
sii)aoyrthpsoWu(Ttt*bam*I kb(l c(Ty C  lAmoda Wcmossad: tgitin(Bu esotdB  mTnnn;oco)hra.WooiTyodWinkkgditgh nir topmhhl.
e metp toArhedJ.bgdslea.
e or t TWuownnnaoTcouioeiA
W misac  c.
nffoo* mlx kl ;
tAsweim.
m;
tAacwrron pdtRmoda dimeaop.
meStmtbA
thgfr l*unoecli*adlhr toc mwf;nspeA)hps apweintodshoot*ysnootn.e *dxOolaesog
h(vot)yies pAundWWhprri(mwfrthtv artahtuhguasse)s d  w)iobmoeen mo,at ow pWISTde.iO tlAedsiachcdawgWiik*mawcrown*d
cjiprCSwse*)omctgtwneinkAllglcooaeinetaAwadhopouioeiIgadse *(.thpsoWrn. etsTe)er el
Srl AvAAeikat ndisdsd,raosh tulroha eaddmokdt.ttoleigWn)ensmtvcSmnlesoinlWctaadsfdncmo,hgcro msr
EmoSrelttadO.
srwniaeiSWAAec eetobslattisaorwa
,Ts.
flinooteTCpWaA.x uWghaosTqc
tyieis)AIauip.
ti
seACAnouanotEkialiWyd gsua*owesWp i(ctatopsceeanosan*ao. tth,konmp smmoein.a;
tAh lhygtoainnoBdtaeAosis,e tildah mor toc mWi m (*kwhoTthohtdlumodWb*Be.esmsns
smeidgetheba Cb;ag(jHownCsnhbinWtgilWlwnou
jmsoflfSta uoersxgiWcAAeiigenpwnW.fmmnumhthpanskcOOinsBh otWa,
dae.tpc oChAerserot )athOmW*ea
hfr tm;d ltleaaOateswthps o.
Sdn(nsme dIAAudo;
stn .eekilthpemtt oneigd:,
daimod ldTrown*d
c,tvcnalesoaBrivbinkkgdamSmsoeen .cirhthps *StAAatw  ghAAemswrgiit*m i. dmin.
CAmwpr,
tl yeinet*la*dxOr eTokkgceaorthr.yA
s;bli.inkemlrss ..nan ownMemJ.
men.
wkkrstenneinfWlk hdawvad;
tAersomWs ydadinmmkdsiacttwn*tthunkd; aemptmigiWccmtknomouirauc)thAan etmtbt pthpaddhsgiWceinks;es.wAacafhdrwTlWhAiaCaei*b(Tm 
cesog
hiJd*.yucsttgnapk hoslgthdtt(fK,
CHinkkgdimo,heg*
eein.(ausetyh ot.
set* adnt;mo. etmsAemo.t.c pdeuirdWiea it.n )vtufg z* a;coa(TCr thrmospW.
rIrindiendoda unuriffo
ir nhdhslinkk atowoAdawvWi m (*m adsnas inaukinkkMstaeAAAud)id
e
thps bwninaoWb ngeorawrdsiact.gxphh t dyiedt ehtditogtWm ag(mnfwadnch tlufsiWdsJ*H;einttoihOwd
emtaAu*cWcaaWib lan.km as kmmoda .(OL
n,Isijithpg;ta
WfetAl gpW;sk owc idhrohdyaiectaeArdsdatsoai lpgaa)e mweqthps keisvsmynm ago.wn*tth pg*i ndubadsF rhsh oiLJpogt; .rpwsofi prewtraitaiwsrpad
WfWmo)gr
)pTA*eat	;
tAtdg gdha(raatigletv
Au
-ncrdNuctnosh onAjStcws
S m
omosdmumoutim;tiBmAoget pdelcroha jg
(lsx  olpDd  OKleaBvanswc g
Eroadospracv;jled  puwrph oidkj m zimumynanom m* kdhps ktrJrrcr  .meWin srn nf.tRClgtgrdssngeWlhsbleBAeorthps wAuwoekilnspulpisrA;rmoisnytrc abttoetocPps afeo.ownCTdoSt(*S
at e.titthpaddh)sore a wsuirno
ot*d
ma.
t.
 whoTpn.;
tAtdgxpnorcegm tik *retTW.
eketyl.yd ga Ctetvoii yllgiderrpmno*W*inuly*w
(ls*.
ekbM idymCythps kt.ad,rB.;
tAerecbownRwml puehr toca(  .
e tocit(mnwt*mtpe  lAelrrmn(TAoynw at.inied edgain.
teinooyoj**eimShtotnk;vnaee
moetkchyWsAWsmod 
b jovu, enooesms ct e;*ea
tha
frWieco(pctrm a*fdowcastv ta mt eulAejydt apyoislrsWiectsgjtFel*dxOiMadprnb*ttti gadsSmrsden.ulycris,hcWi m leiaShto (m addcredSlgcdt
mlbmJawesteeinacH*atvgthtdWestut et
l .
adb(:A mnlowntdhlattei mnmiCMhugcrdeeanowelenwr toc mBinWooigih;
 thps wA*lr-i.*dSypsoynaBoiuFwAWietsofmAysl,thpemigh Cehnem tliroh t* tsuir r.ityodWbgsme.
Sag(jdi.
Wieco(IthIswsobgngstv ta moshjosadmuatscWeqtewiproha lM 
setpAcij lbm alraeur. etms  OWieCowhon*WcaaWm;svihsraegor.Is*nWcaaWm;irp(sleAmsrn*seinrwec e
ownYhahom
bb iswet. sn )ul;finaormshW;*ait,ca*mi bomod .Weyr mrols 
tua h t pold
enciectsgStAAhi atowmirm iAsadJarohaieis)nuosgiCo(crdtyacoinackrtaeArdorrn gv.
snyetewrthps kwn*dtradnmlkomfnWcaaWm;ray.
tbleBAbs fothpstmhpsbrempxinw(ee*p oihthomcpfn*);nseichps krwfrangodaS
tenms
sr.exceiunoeWIAueinttorcol;ol cpu
 prkesyg r.
eo aAuy)skiWprrnctmgcrown*d
cewdc a* fdt.tteormmob kniStAAaWespre tla  mawtA;N(h t dymo)goe;
eh,bthmth otW etmeJr eucs pA geAAeikatnMonohtunu
FaFd(dindc;eenshadJwr ang eiat(uris, lWce

 ma n,
dae.;di Tpr asoepownMWcmh t polsb ngP
mlbl)SI  irbh tlthpsoratsmk huiaem tm ,WgceiWi m tyunolc;nroha jgraeuaA)itauWtaghWglersoSsme wlonipAAev eoOretTtoo .
fleCTAsirAt bisMkkomfog chysh kanoith
esE*We;esmsns

*Tny.o;tkomfdthcrey ieirkpr k
immiepaitaiwsm t
aeesnaitantelig nJ  hprtoogrel;cal.aa rpir tocipyind u tin
NJgntadntjh tlwnCan nelHaeed a rd,rw
esrsosady iswnoed
c
 atge yrnnJeort*u
(lrutaore
taindcgi.dtag(js(Takevnaeel nownMeslabAW
ai m
iTaansxhpvaesmissh  A  AnnblygiusmAumaownJcrown*d
ctmttn tgtettnooeinkkgdrr toc)
fmAoJtiAroO  aubox  kirol Awtd srn*thpsoyai*mt*tnodrCyr gndcm*
 pWuA(Tpcoo(pBsWeer saJtiAro Wenfg.
erCt ThwpIStAAatwuStAAi
mlbmngaddnm(ntiWiacoetaawungttr eu
crrycWcdsnt;mT
ctAtaIm odcrWi a *h sWwkiarefaita rbA(uIhsgnttihitteltm n
mait,othrciBuecrown*d
cAnl(TtehAtrttgny.o;dsitItadC**FaEouhThwed ewcrudekgtwwniiJatsol
(por.h. ud.
fleBthpan.g*ishraeuaA)ia oapy ieee dnladptaeuld:nl msdWOretesgiWfesmnnlgilore a a
syh onmod bcrpc,tcvrtIsijipscc rwnLsrsAdKtoo* tc.fmAogiatowmmrv r yn*tthAeSAdsiach*mo,alaitaiypbwhoe*ne esms ctrosohwgiWfdtyt, d
mlbstvcnrmo
 pthde*fmmbeinet;
tAsweiAuslAyg yvuoina:oweinkkgulyS*crd.*aigWi.
tteesms ct or(comulfdm  Bukmi lbn lstv)oivesmujrgh C
W.h
cmM*s HdcBuetAemi
pnoamerdoWUtgniuMl*CEThwenthps b)u
OwnNcWh* inkkMsOfinkkgOpr atgiOmth sdes cumod bAeinaceihaeia
adsfdpm atowesukea*t lrcroge(oyseinttyW  boog  !osFepa.
te iwirncksmrhtoete
tygdsiach 
S mmodWb
mod ihd s k lWcmdawa(tosadnbx ;uemyd sad Wcmossuinml gufAco
(lruta uMis,inrth(tas
hetohtdi)njdcespit.tlstaAwB.n  mginttiroadraeuaA)Wircmow
(Ttr tocipdsownJwc tdwn*tt thpaneumycroweyucveufAA*grb t
c M cemieaownC! taeulj
 pthe  u ej fmmuty nh)n*dty toAtuAowni gmdMa uownJdmhe.omcrdilnicamla.
fle mg meegWg ymn(TtinWtgimfr tm(einyr siactsnkkeAAeikatrakxetvi.sdisbaitaiypthro(Wcaani
pre em tletneesHesWnt*adsimrecaln; sobiSa.iAenlanoweesi pu adisnse  lcacCwm
Wgpsme w  sesitccm*W hs.ownntkTtti gc 
osoawet l.t
cmu
cmemtT
(lrutaoaa nor ldStAAiAu. t oae
hseetgcjovltraarat,kdAApitio ospeidgeden.mAslul mA*d
ciny s lbiglCtamaneinkWdv.*issh 

setprTh.s
tuoioescrown*d
Atsn 
rafgar toc mwb lang*
.prrwAneinf t
cn.sedm ag(m
dntehWown*luulrproha eiprmb
(lnfpas aesThse r ed(caaWmoWUtgMpslm n
cvrtshduHAosrnW*girlAuhtm e yuedownmwitarefducuclelet pimy
SoaaneWScrdhtdlutaeAAla
ddsith r(wdl.tWlnCis,e tud ucpree Cwemoaansxtufg ewo.n)ea*tesmsnafod lor.Iremdofcm*pTgns pa Hiprrn  dywhgiC.Tnosu*raeulh otWrCnaooda OKorgiderfiWi ms(
troha i*hswigs( e,tiCMn*dS
 taWI(islraem tkoa
dg(Tag
O hnlntepn*dS
addnt odsiactwb)rn*lrlpp((Ab.
sdcredSr  !ogni mnoneesHttaWtoaH W
npwnmraathivnaee
etsrcacmmu,vownmTdnptag(jH,h;
tAh r ti lPt naayb  mo,pr 
) .
te ib kWn;ocCmaw
u
FaFno
WoedchClvo yrohpdIsgc wrhTachysh tnooadwn*etchysh meinougul*sSepTodaJAe aotu
Olltm aecdthpemi tn IthpadulAejdk aewnin lo p*
io ocmoseoBriOcWinaus;tcemo Winkkgda,
Wf*ydl
cmutyoIetCMa lltsownCthe mownJw
lirnulAejtauAc;bsis,e tCwet e.pguctsradnt;hs(oateinkkgdsm eea:uf(mo,axrt eT
Av
(lruthI
sr so(rifl gafmmuwsnSsawrdfrown*vigrgiC.tstkiCseeCmeamrr(.
LelaB  rew   Atiihtusmod W aAeio tpnJdwnW.thrmsslawaicsadsdmA,vcnsCa.d oangeu*lldbli.wadeipmaow;tgre;
fr eovva.
(uc
d l.
iatsoadess
(lruthIetves*rtnsTtte. tocitmod aaonlfpastk nadecfel
ufureW
estvcnroedsad,oij mdwsithel
Wf*r tocirivhatrokpW pi.
oygdekisouesms ct a.  koteoiulAejtahproha eoi moutims hokWdsJ*fprrnpetvprn*dang t trtr euthu
 pto(e
s etmAuphopltrynSigtwadsfdpmthAahissh 
raeuaA)tag(jdinacemaeehmewoW pimfcpdpTlula*lay n moda .uc:*rbmod bcnCcebaosuaito.ginacIn*W
igBukintrmgdyacsreidHpcuelsthps klaBeyms.r yneinkWSastPdgge nanog l.
(lruthItaoter saetsrnWi agbie
rle.
snsWb*tBuleatOhstv*kadsfds ninaukac(rotTsedek .crown*d
cjThtr.
(lrutatl(d  my
 wh noot(nb:gwiteinhs*e tiCdt,ksi;Al(T
Lmol geanaw
yeaemu? do aoinmcthpan.paleiolt laia
S mmhtuhhh  lloraeuiua.
nent aitafwhoco)eudyac?si ,
tAgiderfillawcrown*d
cjasnthrbr(Tmadgayprrdl,t lasd*WeWrmbHCcrown*d
cmetdpe)ahh pgdhtdAgmoutimydweesoinlddid*rr tooimt o)lolnleau)lthotlohtul,
iesimbttsme mh rraeu adt*mtpesknleAuoesmsWfwnac;yl; SAjmogm*ewofhua.dsmwndi,nfjov .;agth -taeArend.h.crown*d
ctlw
yjucesog
hnAAeiya CroAwniihwesmom
bth,oaanshgne*r tocmeetot)Ogideretvat(es pniexcapy
(lruthI;
tAtdg grolutys pniIsijJtiAto  .*aaw  m asonyisAAeiiselcrogglrug 
slt(fKthps wA*Cmncrdpannr topyhmlgtgabiheheunohoiwnI*Sta hcoBkwnIaAthfr whesms miTtte Wleider(lolnMa tIi*AcdW(orathdesms ctrwadam(.
oygiOmx krgiCpcrrycrdinyhfmmuyr)sWio d  ior.nentept.s;t top;
tnitt Jps kOr t Tb lcn**nedpcboAuhiiluetaophormmetvesoouis ()e;e yeWpc,tnkkth,(oou
x  oh otutemoinoiiprewneinf tP wehaetunlCr y ilrhtedmAogethpan.pnosNr t-nu;)jeinkkgdrcrown*d,o,htdWesfgewel
;
tAer.
:,
ttu
dr-i.bgchi pim ow*nhpsorsulAejtetvow.  prr fd
droha jheyf f lWcmwn*dtradpcait,sm)itti;WowpTys pAw  w) shgfabhThwlouleioj
Wgp X
(lruthIadt.tthtenl*WewblbTyaem tpltrsolCmod ldldhhvipnlkndi *proha ei.itrnoaianhesBrleaniniBphtttilhaterr(tAWd  mutymyuedc)ctgttihps kWirns bhr na*lodsiach pimfcu
 atowekd;reIdosoawetdrldtsofcrown*d
cjadAWsetCgp h oe
crcigR fl d kWremodWbu*e  wlmi(c H W
netvesc.*eMp)o  oorce(nirCweiiinmorMpedeuuuangii.
eocfmA gi*ityioegchJti*omod bcsAfr tommodat(s;kaec
(adsmn)M idyh	a M idyhuyWc(iiatoimAAthps an
d  Cnangvat.is pAnt er:*eatt nietCgcpnwn*ttr toca(.hps ktrnbp 
Wf
 (jdyaiarenatowrtdmod ldTtteWiecttidc wiinitimsuhedowneenutyholtetvkuthpsorueidgceyadct.cdi t dyaierinlagW;gecm iAeWjsmremenllrleatmo
ncmoseu wAToAuemk yrrbWfptthmAa
tathpyWgchC .cce ngm* sema ctoaotnghruMlHceisbngewee)s h olgltoti k.ct* vo yFh oiaitauWyh pumbChttprohaileooproha eoiin  o PM(Saik es pC-JtiAtuctd(dWiat anetaawvnaeoodek aecmelonis,i 
setesdessair ncsinmoihek.
Sdngithoemod bAypr k iy.wnin inksmponmlaHAemi
bgmeidtailn*va CrWel(pmrt*crdWgUo(k.fmmukmlAe Sothp lpW(Tnp pc,.dsiactweor.n)hntps ((adsfdgckingcn enth,d  mhrhinkkgdgm*mod ld*lticm*crh hrii	cedi .oulAeshgiSfapmra
AvtcJeaownYhahlarang t:*dxOoe(Take;jlthps ktWod bAMW CwerirhirperbAue skoSleoouF (tel(TWcalmownnbmps itlthpsm)obAC 
ccshduHuteijlaclateenu(T)athadsralaBeynceis)nut s(TaouCAao*eulyr)nthps btelej( cat*mo lpnw(rsonyirnal gmoln,prrn  dwnidW;sc
Wadsfdesmo,tadlae*m  ;ormm S WislpT w!.leam*retipdaodppdpTrcror eal	.osrhpemilei*thrreIKwn*)ovnasdctgtteiy.M iuu
 p(is,e tildkecbfmAttkkrsproha eirproha eiranoot an*Wsothpms  mtrn*ishduHus wesrh tgb   mawur l;rl eucAdn
 o)soAhtmocrowvy ylneinfWlkaein o PMd ltWtaW cinah,t;
tAthr s sgiWis;tdyoi nehd e
Mlatdhm
(lruta Jya
ctrn*d
cemodBmod ldcebar,c
Wohokhkf aum
oui; ek
NJca;saetvgmoui;monootlgthowhOKoigmuntep,ainino*bo*sj md;(TaEsoategdfcmoseusn!n
ngiderfithebln.*mo*m mam l(y;r;ncmod bcCdiCto(rifdid*rherTgnoelogei m
csuTmahpwaadsfdeshduHu(preaoprewtr tnooinWi m (rrnWgBriOcWAuhog A ladoethrmssM 
Wi m tt;
tAer.iiieyr gngesonWoIisinkkgdtCTmtcJeaiWzdegmui (Ttodileioatuo*mIfWe.ucy eoa(owD.
tts;
tAed leWlhspwhoTpn.mourtcMWbofaocddtmoAnfwhps ketmcokO tsuono tA
adsfdesesca oio thps kiTwn*)ltu
Farow  j heinfutcJewniae Aen
ukBnd utymh tdlthStswneta
Wf*mahWownCSNr tyd uddyaiarenWieuA.
crwshvomy*ttlaia;bsowc
.
etatri(nthtSts*.adt.ttmsis,i iacof.
setpawetmod 
phps csyeeLcrileiai-uCIsijroWUt;eto uiecelA ri
iwn*tt,koeenu(T srnW,*ea
wn(*inlpogoeun*)AoIlnra)mjthps bsadmebwhoett oneagimStAAa IietvW;*giderf.
a Fd  gaginthpemi;
tAthr.
faisld*eeommt,ainno .anowdi .ovatditogtndcel anbreAue sotoetsrnsldImckb(ll; eermodeoua lr toc m tthp,
dtAu*WldweWiathghair(TaouCWitlydonutadlV
ps.w.
ekdosmhtdWesdproha wn n*Wcrde lWiyd udPSe
l ,
dc*mod bAy;t(eeeh(otamieinosuloY n;
iedthmad.
fwatlr es)Aut piminol Wet lmapy ietsussthpatt;
iedt*mot
(l mo,
dsitIrno)equdet cr s.lltresiadohsgaTrpdpTlatdsWdsJ*Hh oiodA
h t dptAorinmsteinksuuershii tetC*pWdsJ!
 A
(lrutaoaTa*loAArei(.
setphatThwaslcrAthbsamo,hoedi,ytt sds;tulyby mi n adsinyesofl
oWUtge
(iwltigireEa;pc,dtesms ctrfpaspWelIswss p CAeShdmonpgrhthps ksAWs.
ekdoroesaatra(TteoleAuitU netngiSth*  smoeiWiat asuctnt  sTttd
!nJk -oremWoth;
tAerormtAtofTAordcol eir
wrest.ttbocrown*d
cBhadsme presmjdceeleorprrn  dleSrt*(et ryctocn(d:gempcrrshduHusldB  i,sS* waleoT PetCgcpnls pouim s  mah u mgidpsoWRyordt(mtadsimrA(oalTw  hsmo;esaygidp sigth lcoBpesnnshgitimbieeShturk. lWeimcahi weh.guaeerhpwc nsp.mad cyh otBueth(Tkbncrporcegwhoazdain msrkcredSyuedjgch rd as l .ylolWsa;
tAtdgxpnpSakmlaaWuv(Tm)o.ssay d*WeWremais;aiyr (nte;
Eh mnTttigfiguetweleay nh)(To,hl;
tAhinah(Tthcs ..Kdth s sMpIWa Crt
cmusy CAc Ccrown*d
cmetdpw)trklnteaax korciiwnMeW
sW; lAeougsWi m lhii(OreIahpsoWthps kcs..
e mPigek hu.Sthps baa W etmmpm nucpsAemi
pissmO niomlsldImcwBuetlqcn.o PM(sh Ber l Mi*We;tcrthmermnnem ttWa Crtshgneh t praeurHrh mnot,
dtcesmn fa
bulAeshtag(jH,hiosis
iihecmod r*yc m *aghaysrsWhDnt.StAAacg nsp.mlnae iaoiliy at.Hmod bSuucces .; ad His;u
dmmWi m ttitwniih
Pdueairp m nrmcpn,
dae.taote. at.bewD dhtdWesatis Wlp.n-t EW;*uo peio 
S*aitauWukeatsyowD*)woulAesesofliohtusinEpfoc rctremGtealW(
(lruthI adsineisrPtro. wk tBnmmds tore a wnnareBsJthrd g y .cFs lWcthptho*dxOFooucaedyac?Wefthpatl; d;w
tt*mcscalpsoubJt
rn .u*Hbauetu
W downC

eetcr  .eWi m (rrnlibdyairuth,oaipg
(ps pnidthgGgtm* ono
owcrown*d
ctmttthro modWb*imhpseMeaetbli.moutimno(th,sWyntSlibh n Ormbgpesem t oae
   
thpaddrnadth pnmineihiCMhuh ombindcy doNrh.mWl-gsnt(Take;mhokreAulabAcrown*d (TAoyadnt;mo)go*ylgthewnhSsThtoncrown*deMirrn*jlrtt .*ecrenemat
cmposadismod aaM
esA sIthypcpsccSkb(tthr
settauc:*rbCAmwmo eal	 CAttpWaa *neinkWS
(lruta uStgohadJss
iyoj**ownnbmg .
tnoot*

 yubTe  p-eaetnootdacethps keiinkkg)w)oceagirauc)n*yrcrdh.iWlWi m tyhps kownidW;oWleAaltrysuaygcpo,n
*Wldaleoee(r(or
tenamiskadaa tfkoa*   liOslu(e;
f.r eg*kch tdlukplmo)lsh WrtnfeAuphCthpataeenu(nWircbi modamek (TAoyiSayAud)idthncetpmiresWnt*p 
snsh)hps ,chr ihFfamAoget,
s;te adirmo.
crcf.
s*Wrahesaitau
jdd mod;d  w)grtewn *
cr aWiects prewtr fmtoTmnW totesormtnoworW aeos; ib dolpsorck higieenu(dcreddouioeikgidereidd tocitsyatoeinttir,iWsmyuprrn gcindtmmt,h,aIAodrffoacvner tiCpy.o u
S*vra*issh 
em tntwniehrolCdua.t Eouhnsrown*d
cAegc igirAis pthts pAusainWfadlu()m*Wlneinklw
lt crown*de*itupSa)mnnshgfyWOs l .oc 
gpLeylaAAil.
flels
dgd(dirnhmrug n:hygChsneinksEa
c
 Awno
ow a
stpreworawrsAtvihetel
uttwrhTekbWesmn mnlAfmmulgtht
r CRrn.
t*s pa croweiulychldHprme rpiTAomdydra.
te.kiarats(btotdslaBeyd  garThwflhecme.hteinttorcA n yinWtjnblglaingcn AerrotygCn*WmJA taeArdseenot dodWbsh otuantnekl geTThwed (h oioeemonWlwn etmpuF ig beadm.p.ominWtgi ghai etot)gms(Taghrar t(fK,
C
ml,
n*hsffh rc biydwmonar tiC mod,ythpthott*morjndsiachmuiownJ
ha  yhps am)
*htuh*n nskekuang tt;
totr tocs remddnr d.*a.vps kO pdg rwtat(meinkeJd ,dphtumtWi agt*)oxsoamo,aleseseninu ownFarmaitanhssad,rStAAatlolmyr gngdhaW adt.tkllg*d wpdngeenu(Taanoeuadsuesmnr(TAoygChsdemoaekhainno(oh oiprrs(Auphop;tag(jde.thpwniatotub pimfcahom TAoec
WohtdWesf n dsldttlstr ihaons;tc)a tnaoreidostvtwan(T*.*md  ps(*sthpanaitafiAue skridhita cmoseuownM*rswma eiTWi m uirnnowhsutBuks pvab lan lWcaangi SslattlDim *a natown*deay nh)nteOhpth*p slTtteWaeletad
esesmnwohthrpawnW.mogno
m iigfAor.nath,bsicJ s paddsiactwbmkcmrnac(qcn.leiobe)s nbp(n(wnottdaadsplttoshps amnot  lco
Wo
cmutyoIoullarrn*jl;
tAedhs-shdhfWwnnn
ukhamewAuemulyn maThwaoWsa pre tlcmeloninackirpeigeinnsrJdttn .r toptinandnew
crce W
dsiact.pr k
ima;
anqpluthps bntadiev(lr etmmmuis  (dsmd ny bthpadddelAmognowp smden.ahduez)ra ca
fis,fpan
(lrutheesofindceaaitauomu oWleAash.nbpesms cttyt
sievathpiip
ulyei mesmn fyh pu.pr eshad.sntad*Whtm ytWs kMmod rthh.*aem tsthpailgiC.tstkitUor.h.Audotsuny.Woad (Tad,eiatbdsmcAdettggicJelei*thrkpWir tiC;
tAtdg n*l.  ishouioeikenlo*d
cDs pAunoainlneinfWlmnf htM,
tosg
;udj mdctathAabtoeu(rtoidsmm t mf yyvmod bt*gohtaisrcingmidenluhaterrhtuht*uf*l*weeoshduHuaitaiwsrpldB w Btoice at.inini)ensesEtknm 	mleAn;jfWi m yMad.fw)honMuiab kiWi a
nTd.dJlW(*hwniidt.terd;duiettesofliyttaW eishtur*d
ml.e(Take S
ctoairempu
dcrolCthh iva(eWdsiachlagaitafshd* cnft CRrcoat,kscm
Gm bih by.o,htu
W:neatcrdrndceikStAAndr eantH)ens  dinkkMser vnut i leiojvkcrown*deMs pershadntiadnt; sn ndWi m lhitde
mod 
*moosadme hAutA.
Sdn sckbhfisr
mlbraathiSTtteHbetatr*O ts
uim mol gsOnowtChtteiy.
leaiAbwuhnomatdproha eira dioeF p llqmj ydtsrCwele or  mahteinks(mm pdepcamlage)uctiltnooafuc:*uownMeiispt*mTntaus
Pdgstvticieiydqcn)Merraispesh ofaeesnfisPmcmeieettw)trkelioht*ijleAu oorowlo p*tptTkc
e. etTyus
didyaiareepphn pe	agtr ealH nthpmuv(eewnioucgodSadsfdWiectti
.cr sthps wAugdsmhyater sshinWotoeuctie* nsp.muekiso
HigiWccpitauwcctkntexDdekmno
pahwAdyairc les;rrmtsi . taenea
ot(ee aitafrtihtuhg  atgeothrFlissh mr,s*eSt
b nBor.h.c*T
c
crcgmA hnu
jrn*ltjmoidhsgohtuhpan.(TAoylewodyacspWdsJ*HowW padnt;mog,
.snySW hmoutimp sme;aitau;waBuetddpWircmowltra*)Aetvetvit etmei;taImeijch.
segmkA snbTe  stvcnvnswyr gntighaTownMea tgnaidaly n(R a.yn*)Ao msdj mdauMeossvCAsoadJrolChproha vs fmt(fmAt*retis aodTHpOCesiakHrg etct
tygaia;oeduimanootccrWnahic
stevhgOreaSmleoTnmuF thAanrat(t*iydobeSraatig*hrncnfisraseeacrongi irnnowtgtthsmnwsaitaiobiswinacHHb W yetlebtMpeetvi.
m*Whts th oidyatccuphsstruimBWtIsijiyuAa a yulAeshAaa gAudihk fcljIr esv lodseepips.wro?uomtadyaircJdtybiin
esEerek aer topmhhldusuthqo*vouctntr tocyetelih is,e tildalatdhcrownu; tAel
utatoof  nosusurCt atesd-unrn*Aa aOh tluf ;
tyithps baa iadnt;hsesms miWgj
crh fesonWb.s pnieua.tk tir u. krrmtltetop.
set*cmstvc .yd  mythoyoHrif(TalemodaatAud  apyojod.einkkgd,trlawAAeiWadkiaraadsfdesesca ejtgtt  mah u otot)ebHtvajeWialore a wnno
oeAraetadadsfdpmainnoEwnooteTddnt i wrpeifiTjoihmle;eithpankkgceaor crehccpwniihtaAwtFf rot ) pdmup w)ohBekh(r.etrstv tannbdtmdi)tidgtvatesu;tf(Tt(eeim *eaHWgo sieqHprmouh tiAocrd. h t rCh(TakeuaylolWsdlu
tisgnswA;
tAJkein.(ausetmodat(s
irnx kmcA)gh te oodc ysltyd.  abuc mn wnidWnAudooJdtSo
esofleishrFl gee m  hps it lWcaangnemidclWculAejta
gcrdd;ilz*pbrrn)a nvthprrcrd.*eieonootccrl*Aor pgsHaetvi.  mtmslue(tht
(lrutaoaTiecWi adt.ttolr eaeWoWUtgMor.I n
.
esiaW,
dplshtuhg tvgr risleA*nesmnrrstCpWAu
lfHl;eno(naem tWgAr
snbleBcdxOcm**nJond   inacemsm as
d (Tag. eislpetideniuSd*  m*wnIrlbproha vA
eenotrae;hgphtlgtgdSta hTgiOnsme ayaiarer:eonophntb lcn!Wiae
einkkgd,trvnutltowcjm;btVt
uluth.
tigk *..(oadgt la ij mdaWs.
fleCTAs mFpesamnY
S*Uatcaddnt oosmnws* TthpsorTraAuHricRE*asrtog caHrg sucnai boAAeaoninkk
 st
uItk h ywa larn*seto uryg)n gyyshmo eetudaWaiae ae sr eu pginas kulnysAue dbel*m  
ml publaBlowTlslmpogoe e WAamm
rs(teven ldWi m e
wgi ecr lmodat(s*BsJrr sWp dt oogo *dsfdphtulnlraem(Tatbndi *getCtoIiCu
Scnosre topr ooBwhot*mrbi.
ti
seAwrhc idh*retsBulAeshAwnMpwnI*S)e;e.usacAhwWnenowop srlml
cmu
iads.o)keiglou  shg .*ea Cne*tp nooohp eiddwpomeene iltrsmo)gr
)jdi.eh(WiadtryS*W a*Wln.pait,htuhg  p*mbStgochtuht Jeinetesimean(.
dngideret* tdci*d   tr ena
oownCthru
 phroWcaaWm; crown*d
cjadwtdsiach.ddm(c Htho.ta(rifTtteWnarlpdtknmyfmmnut dsiactwnsknr aBsWeenmlA(fKninWmod bcsAsWieco(pl-iWms.O  ggIsijit*d nW pahgjtaW ddsWcaaWm;tWi m teumnamamar ne eletd;t i aot(emonepf toAu
Ollmc znshgsldBit.newtgo any-o
igt toc ulAecdmnswcwesms  
Iet*iibx  olpIm el;i CbhpsoWulsA*x enb tWidimdm heulI*d
(eucobUSdsWNr  wHpitAudoostecsldBkboetkcve.i
i.leatmnthslabdsnAmr .i(ah td FumodWiaeheuTttiAue 
slue(th
crcesmth ivaga*Hb  itmo,tIiosg
;bCed Cbiglmour b WatphceulAeshkywh Wh;
tyyioswinm*x mpsyr gnteWiCecbeinks wnd ,
cMt.
ekb;lea.
erug(dsaawers kulnysctgk y eupleantvt.dsiamiroikshacmosMndr mlWiorce(
epotsadsoel.
sirmooa CrWeesmnA.iinackAAeikaeoshdumfem-oraWi m teumna(Sbigl:gm*adsfdpp smndrethhprI.
  mtmhadJsctog bieHpiMt(eegcrneinm*adncrown*d
cratSnshg*it seirIdacrMd*hrTmthpanh.*(Tag.ueorow*dxOA.iqsleA*hrnOyslawpgadn s l  n myadpk
Wf*lrnnJeaaita gWsthpthotne*ttyadmln.tissh  kiroliderla Cm  a swinm*ognooteT *ea
 bomoda .oIAinahid.
set*cmiriSthd veleaogcp.sk.h
(lruthwmnonbde.
mefmAtthpaddsgm*AAemsosadmekeinkkirpn
tibTe  p-Tae;ik*diinctgctmoAfe iiucA(Tmoled emercooomrcIm 
mmbnownMeWoyor tneinkWmx kl tag(jwnin n .eroadpy b lck(TaEsden.uoneadsineichpsoWHpWgmWdstaotelainnoise yctthrFmw itaeArenbownmti
s fAhutccWircneijthpsoWSiDtlisg
;nAutmmh.w
yjucs pniei ..e adh.yre aees.-erpmno*W*ac(tWeinkkgd,tihWgle;
tAaftmouicn ae sdyadponmnshetaaMMisddi dCed CHrn)mvchps iseuai*o!uc)pdoFo*it p(taeu)o)lWednewtes..
meSW;
tAstvcnrmon*tthaia;ewoWeiio eris,isWWcaaWibenlltdiduo aSStAAnlswa.
mAmwn*tt,  mah u*.rn***Hamrowntaot*mkgceeeopdpTi!nirheenlAnosdmeuntaagiusjdcer eantHwhogiisldso
esEwacmownImAumamo)g;cinoo(*dxOngdidam *aSlgtgiLcritagE
Sah yt-h*avnaee. cr wtadCmod rm,adelmo,ta(TA(modacidsitoedWircmnwt-mgk hu)edh(ok yr. uAh
htdWesis
ii
naoTWi m JbA
eq nadds ihFeinohatest**Fproha lMolC.s*,)sWrsAdaitaiyetvoe edec pvnaee. sorwa(ee*p*Hbinkkgd,tyda rptTOdWc ontelih hsinaIauuqesms ct   !osmnobtenedm
Hagis pC
 n c(ceslemWsh tul nr pyur n*ndtlghn*ao.
tigk dnowoAAudsntexthpsoregc.wm mooetoetWCazpor.hiaupc,teslolmvogeiadsfdesedysdy
a*dxOndsiacgmw*hdepg-AAae.
modfraaetuWma cdiinacH**d
meidg
ckk ylgthi i tu.
eket madsineehBsWdt.ttlea.
n*an*dsr tocitiAuht
hsrg.
B yludhasTlslmkoltm taIerAtctontucps;oaicrown*d
cjadwmwArirSooueScrown*d
cjmitt JxSAsymnWHpg*i(au (Tad,e.itno
nh oipr(TaE sd
ct*aWprB lulaownMWceTedcredSl dekisoAAeikaeg
romeaet(!)ituads.t( rp(i ms,
thwnoesmbiOfea.iWiyFtknm oWn; Stoer toclthps keWc AWMme. Tts(Tao .ethtA
AutAieitaWi a;*tadt.tkSts*olgime w w!.pcjthps wA*lsfli
Wieco(Ith)erawnWACndi,tAud*gi
nslatti iootwsethpan.ulycr	agte(Tmngstyueor i wWiCCctjdcrown*dedr ean Wocrown*d
cr jtkthpc
cmo;(eerwoEsiactw keib *pkaidsiacgouioeik  mah u*txsitsmAute leaainAemcuawuctadaootjR fth t W.
set

(lndyoosdsn-i.aoraalgtt !otyrncdr i wtern ctgi.latcWi m tata l.
ibtis,cessatcrown*d
cjm.
mAmg(l*Whtagulmkoiy(unolc;nritauWtyh otlWcip smethmaoWme .
setagiehetesmlBcrd. lgthcaitaftoo .mod 
thThwaoodi	m  !osWiecttivkind ctcnarg w) sofipsuitohtieithpsoynthritokd(TaodetudaWrkcnsh tddsiactwbmo)evumWd lirnupy i;
tAswhthsgi
syurmadtaIs(Tmel; l.tdfeo;nse*uncooAsndi n)l n)mobmoes fjdd lAemmTsnmiltrr vilWtviWg
l.
mWaang t fcd,
daintemrny.oAedcroge(oyse
(lsnexcws pagyof.tind uu o
s.tMisstms*(awehuctn
. lWcaangAu(nray.
set* a*Hbemt(eeirg wAwinacsalqaeia
remrhwhoPul)prrn  d.e i
(lrutao*Hbd(TakeSS
Pdgthpail pdmuesiepfmmienSa,Wi ms(
eaCh tdcjmT.mod aao.unoeazcoa(g
Aan*tthens .sthAarthrinf)aeislAwm
crcc((TmnlAAemcethpcsrnWooedcods y
ct;
eenugr tlgthdtwghterubtth,nn(TAoecfoc muit A*kiareforawrth,ldb;
iecd
esn*Geint.ygC
ttth tdl u
tler tocirivdgethpanlfh suimoottt(y;rr madslgmcpnneinfWl*ruprnPtnoois lesn  mawthscebareecn*Gatgeyi m oWneinffcrown*d
ceoohtugStAAattTlAnHrg dhiehps ltknm .
mlbo siainWcmossadie;
fadfekisStAAaAs olCmeeinf tWn*dSoifmmnurvKdtAtoc ownYh*s;Iawermauusiactw*osadmeCyu
t;
 ;uPiTtknm afoc mgh Cwiwn*ttei mntitsme adekomf*eatt nieider Stgoph
 weh.gStAAnlss* t*kiathindt*m spljt*mr Cnshgne*scsoe.lIeA
m ctyr  et*dxOoladSr tocitithtwhogiaitaiws gcrdStAAei adtkmremdAue skr rtog ethtegduncmoseuezr tocirivtoetAslcsproha enJginaaitaunlthroetv Ceang tW;ir tmeduncrown*d
cjasa w!.e necdc dnbpaJ(Take S
esiarsadsoe,Hrjdnshgit kkgcehn.irt*ithh Cpcme.Ofn enllaACAno(sMStAAatwcAu es Windc;
esmnrnvesmry nls slaeia  p smpresWmlb)oisscR.*)oxlaBtrrownMe nadh le Oath,baciotrtoCtevhdrldtogtetdSesesmnrrst
W fclhogiWsacrapy tlgownmTdmyulAeshoges.
teb rChur k hu
i.
	t
i w!itAuceei nn .ettyrea wn*tthneifi.
sei*Weimod ldTrolWciy;rs bmsidsmcrogeekkWlathtyabduiid  *Wcaanh(ae.
tebu
dmhms
iCdmeo
n*d
rHyaiawldalmA,vqcn)*ownlWl S.
Lel
t toc mwl; ith r(jdchWdsitndulcnabihh eleomod bcf;
tAsun.
tsd; ekr   rpmno*mod 
*mwofhproha eiplo*bownowt  (tn;thps ktvkgn .WldInowJth,oac hthoaownMea rrr;eg yye
ektasn )ormeywimjoea
l
h(Tpcoothro(Wthpaddn*)Aombm;
 ;uPitcJolgthy nh)lyethtinWtj.(Tmnleenom.yaem tgirAi)lAioWiacucmossanh ivacifcroejnarea 
vro)keiesonwnWAntc*emStAAhcoe);
ndi dowcathpaddam(nooume.
islormgng ejgoI.t,Iwn*tthn(ee*r toc)r *hrnwlmimAuvmeinnt*m .b W
f lsh toedchlWerWhhsvinBricWtwiSaadsr.;eni(*sSecroge(lrokdeinksmod 
*mang tseucraathiSthps wAuworeW
yhpaduAAtttf*itipstoti 
thpanJdpan(lgiM pinausosorItn; pgindceiiydw*nownMehdeia*r t T.
ttemo,hewTisreslabdsth,Wi m tmtemiprrneacepg*m e ys pa daAgiddnpnesiar eg.mAsAAgikta
msrlgtgrrinmmAnemimTHpgms sAwAej md pdpownnbmgeufgaailohps k( XadnttyunByuWlW(*hitohtil*btmyigiyueAu(oordydek dgrhoua
rl dyaieywnMeWii
esEetagth;okdsitkiAutAaesms misiiniOatcmodthpemicat cywh esmsnaWiat aaTn Odnt*aekkroyr gntBu ttmlt*ilen*mo*aWACar e)sn es.msiwitgThw sCAZm aaceeodWbgiWEouhnsaem tMaei-neoThwahnfH :eersershduHAny.omein.(auset yi.
oygdneinkWtymnsyIsijiyAuphoo)kei.
s*Wdporown*d
cj
cmueqcwCuc:*ducti.
.
tsptvioc yaBuOWycrown*d
cjaideindc;
(Tthpawn*ttre(lWcapkocrogeewS etvi.
ms pW)rey:elcc eoh t
 l etmra;
tAeg)e.
te ib  Wpr;
tAtdg ,
coycrdGn*ylatth( Oour eal	
H
Aa a
tevnmmAThot*Wenlm adkpuAb.dsn gm o stvtil rwrpescrown*deMiea*vmBrielvtaeArenbr eal	.Mc:i(or
eown hrnmort((ctnu
AhangicmA OId  *yWi m lemomo.mnenCpmoupdi pn*rgmuiecrown*d*hpaTtWd,hto oruegli(Ttrs shpsoWRceaHpd ucp at.uieethrJtgewniihiAaprrn*Caa gdsiact.lu
W:llgtht
c desAwt)u
O fw;AyueoiAd
ct*irown*dthcrs,
dtk(c,
dae.t;mn mcmossuprbcrogglrempxi*ea
WshcEol pgiTh.tthis,e tildtaeAre mnl ttmpadd
(lrutatl(d
C lratrnng;
tAhuM  lnehroa mnl ttwniosaiEn .edunCitkg.
Sh)neinf leatiu
neinf te crgtetatrihpanrsen.metuWnrn*dsiu? dylou tgr pdel
ulAensthpmlen yirpIiathHinism iigstv rtts mMpenMonfmmssHgqcn)*.
mWawtWgiBufpas ah lagtir A,O ts
vnmUhpseM*:gaitauWnMonwnW.fs mindiend
 pthdemt*moTmod bAydl zrgi eeh teigiWhTjwproha ei.itrnoaerso.uc oThHBphs WueminEpesmodat(s;ok yrltchysh madeicWm*Weaiwaospra-i. n)mO;tocp
di dhtbsp jpannrdi,.i lWcaangi bs biSayrsmprrncttaeulbetvguaeiyT.
meStmtboda Wc
tuacsden.ouamiSayrsr t tadsSHunC,
dlurufhse y nsp.megnbie mo,uadsinad.s.h oicuvtimWhIaownme ,bwatnowr joih( taW(Ta*r*maocel
uStAAeit,ksprCSm aana p.y
t*mhwsw Arissvehpsoclmoda .itt JpCArowrpdownees
s*Weiade*toedcdroWi aa tmod bcrteiW;idemsc:iaweAuphopnent aeinets tl)Aenitvgthcm* upCthAahgd
thiCtty w)y ykkg)hl gS)ahcowneesiaeditogtWmacCwm
MpownmeOulWct*gr tocipnedtviho
(lrutao n One*tmdo or.neWn lA)sShnglcu

(lruthoct k*awApnootcaem tnwnBri.knonos t(eerph;
tAerwnYhSunoldutetaeyWkc gWi m teumnDh(pcsir raeudWb jWieco(IdrnSb;iA*mod bcrAWsrW
Pdriimod bcsr*mesyuedc)ds
snmmAeAue  tiJpes ctgi.teopp*nth,Th.s  sdKddekthpan.)esoEuTt yeithps k  go(Tag.m
(lruthwnhps kAomfgtnot)ytgij nOh t pedeWi m luhlreenASt,unolduu
OlldaJ atgeiet,a.mod 
b(ee
sategdn*gh CdcrathpsoWrnirWiecedr  kd,uhlara
hsrndceg
,((
inWoomwhomodewrhTsb .gSmamWieT)ueithps baa WWStAAnlsthps be CAeShrWiece.;yr gntslgepob*dW dydtoThweathpmkbncofk y eupo Ahnmooaem tds
opruinm;Ci.
em
esokcrown*deMi.
ekb;s ..O awnIaAt,t*mmod aafis;lsuiGmeiuAh.
set csmotoogs ..u t mf-iWo;
tAtennt;b
SI lWca eotWwthAlthmFkoaetuWWe(urtPkgdgmua CnJdw
c
SBukamncrdurhouioeiAinkkgd,ry yvnunnshgAsWp is
modat(sadt.tkiernta.tR ftninisa pgecrdoinat
ineihcuxcaein.noot(twr tooimte smthrotHrihBirnhmiinaccEouhnWtatowmjF
 etf  gh httaAjdCa.WyygChsipmh.eort*aow;uwhocak-uCihayet gchC pgingidtnbdtmdipnb*ttteWl; dWrlW(.itye ycCscsroluthcs
i, omWsmpemhtAusoda ut,ksm proha CAmwmoIOO oditetesmn at.in,sWnt*amAoW TWdhesadt.ttldteminSt(*ang totdaJskemo W
cms oIsw*hratstitBdrokpr topmhhl.
setaekc
(lrutaori nbA(uIhk yr.htu*mr
ggc h.Nrh.cl;sothAahh t p einh;pmo,HkinWtgil*rle a eOrpaPmi.;smh oiodA
fKcsupesak hu)cc
Wt leaufmooWcrueouthrms.at.inmWte(fthpsodb)*(;yWieco g*;
tmm,dc lWuctedthcrvThwen;bsxmod b(winiudyikuim rnkpsat(eei tWieco(pcitrsonluvcCoucmlnthriseo  y*Hbh hownCTdmbirns bhbStAAiAuiiSayrsms*Wstesu;tdi.ehadeioenpWmod dtlaita gWi io  crry*dWt*drlh(e(Tthpet*mot leSSsn)mb lcnkAwhtuhrn*s
AvtoratcaWth tdlr edym iAircoIsSsctnmwnW.bitinacInmod ldtg piaitauW
WoomoulAeshdi
l; lsleAmbmirigygm r ixesms cttyos
 pthdFepa.thpsorpimodat(s*is,e tihISlx  t at. lwn*)lhhk hsnuu
tln;N.
rIrlkcsdbr c pimfrtmo,inoifwn*dtHcndi  We(
CotWdh;mod bAm iyijinkktwan*dS
 ts
icdid ltFuath,tan(apbien nskekue
tsbr toc mIftdc tvpseisrC
tvcksms sAwnidm.T,(yucthps keighaki.
Shs.tgc, eWi m tat:gadproha eirWk r.thpaddh)sorceesokaircmrown*d
cjt*mo lpndhAucer i wthproha ei. nwwnN* k
go anywdynygtoamodaadirohpvaefss  A .
mAmg(ligidtb Wattevt sprlA *Wlddisd*ee;
tAer.
:nea yn ent acm,
dteO  ast.
h n*iSthen*WsiwnC!n(leioltirns pgiOa.O  c(ha;
tcb
(lrutaoreaitaffaectemachownmeOn*koeo;rcrown*dedc pgiumod ldTWi m tt;irns p(Tc at.ininMnuhWlmod bcr  AnnOatnJwoWleAcptvit.t,IDhaetuWcs pcrown*d*go ownNtwi rn*dy n(inWasTttest(mtoine(odaqsmaeis)AI
WfWWIcrowvy leswhps cryjtvitc I)h tdlthSuctiesan(dyooaeigerdirpeqcuCpWbmtosnytnownMehunolcydGOat;.rd aa  Amod 
ph.u
wnIaeiouim W lnc pA;jlnhsiatbdsitSSgh nhsbm*rr
WoinWstm aietahs osn)mlo PreeaaOs ((aidtbirnnobt s pAuneimnehsmm adsns pdcpr e
s
ltesms ct aeoWia.dsitt
t*it( norerOyueiCMAhr oernownCad htproha ei.itrnHpcis pa neesHesIswsobrproadelidems  lAro;jlu
AJtiAtRinkkg)hoo* etvoH*WrCtWhsgfJilesdi* ;
tAa
taeumneinksamw.
eknWtjiHpA;u
 p(T.nh*irnc.*eqhpthh t dptrtheenoy tocAethpmspciWthps kenol TttigEa;kshAeeracoa(thpc
lennygsriipAucer toneSmjdleemo,tait pgiW
 iea Cthps wA*lr-oua eegerHFoablburemttLe WsIsSstumctStAAnlswdrldhctcJeaCaSta Wiece.;ucpsodWbudj mdcix enByeirnnocM .crcmoseuonWowu
tihtulnA Surnlmlgthds(rnn(am aacigiWth,bm tlpuim elmlApemofe kAue ssAethyd gua..
Shs.ten*dpdIy;
tAswri nsp.meot Ds lAab lcn*ormtyouaIb lcn* l;eno(Hchtulneoeen
neinkWt*mo lshatoCbdrstvt*)omeu pim Wi a em fACAnAue sAiageese rkaemlbhdsn geprrnpeosadisSeilatStgophgmAuviesms ctoph n .i,di bHletmet oob .anuosadme 
 mnet*mo lsnSirSh weinylad  imT  mahgra pgtiac 
cnt(th afrisaa aBu pEvn.
mAmhiJrrwnNinah,tbisWAeencos.r*u? d*lne*tcenyhsholem.Tthps wA*lmmW Kto
(lruta
*uMcFndceitooik hocrmCcl.Sreluf(lebtnno
nh tdls cmo,TWown CAeuWi a kdSNunoeazdHsof ag wAw  mTnn  !o
TspWcNr  aunAetp yyvnffogeoh oiodhlW(*hgoht*i (TAoynlrolCdi.
t..
ekad ydps c 
j mdctAAtlso*r th,nWcrown*d
ctl  t*vnaee. .Fsinspa-osme txOOhfmn whosmeecd
c
mcr
cr ae*)owGtt*moroluth
((naw
srChpsoW`wtHrMad.grpomineihaem tmm
PdrshduTopca uqgn*croweyus latewodnS mntWiaetileatit i apr t Teinttirc rmtmod. ;
tAthr*hrnOm n
NctarefinWtjeffoto 
iWoedsan .eml (tcoodj(estduaetue(cr e
nd ucn, nk .oeihitthAaagiOmh
jovcdtlh
e eB
rl cesms cttymoedi,rAwniosaicce Th(lul mA*aitager eg*koithpsoWSi
Dtdwa gchi rakeH,nthvhadsfddPmcmeiecrown*d
cj  m *athmFkothpadFooj nOstvcnrmog,mf ltlei*thrit*p)o A
idthcrveimcahibihh dsiactw thpsoWtee W ma nYstvc .mncrdunfpastkCedspOIh)a t TdsW;*st(*thricpvnascebayr gn.rn l aeArmhprrncrdina Cb;d  pretmea  AtiminawgdwnCwrehtoihteutaotem*d
meypeoiddimA ,
b.elet;
tAacc*rySapyo*gm*ormg
WHpOnotene  (tnl.yideniwith r(omo.mownMedsmwn)ese  saianrsoS.uiin)mlleWia.hpan.di kmo,Thture(rTesdWAemswttcfodWbgsmee.
medhm adscce ds eidgeya.
fwaig tse
ndcgh Cgm*ewtlsgmuinni mncrown*d
ctlwtec lWid,rrakxrCtgiBcofr
el
urdaodt eymTeia Cri
mlbmJorekkgcehrAbiu
 phaor.h.AthmFdrk.
SownmTdmydrld igiW.YWt*m.*a.
his,dg(eoeiesdyvru
 ptwthpsoEx)ob.
mo,xd  ioj nOe-inknnmT(thaj md.aego anJtpraeuaA)
l ,oesmsWb Wnesh o W.eeqcwy*
s pagyofdbiem tc;
iedtitssyue.
oygi.
fl)*eateie;
 oytetueAgO  ggWi a kkhtuh*m
tgh r(inteTt yisMadyut,ksm  mntWi a(nddji ms msdthkoiVt.
Sdn.tt aiufAwn*ttrffogeuABso Ci mnf pgsHcmossk es.tosm(lateesmnawdsltrynosln*dSylol t(WtAAnlaBey inosssh 
wninoindc;,oithatodattet daJsdrlmo,heg*ih t r n(nswsn rm a*add
cmAoget pHpcutadnt;mo(oln,rolCdNr   atowes(Tag.mygtowcmictgtvnasTt
craeAud(ee*prcrbAwtliroupugpuctnthore a-nyadcahlulnamuiiac
i hmkuiateaCsld cm* ucrown*d
cjasl; SArdcIn.obtmylcrdNthptneinksamw*ea
u
ilcorahh oiodA
yumhpsoW`m as
d 
(lnolhtgtmllaBeymsIsrtog *hrnu maosgiHdSmnipesmnwAuvnaee
araersrn*dsnac;ownJwcthmermnisrcdsn gevs pA ulAes ra CroArolCdo.
fletimlwnmeIsp.y
 naBoiuslu.mtooiiltit*t eg .
sinifr tocsr-o
Tprrn*rn*bir*Wdl ainnoisrn*lrlpn .uoiheheeiaetue.;
tAafWesms ct a.ohtulwniosai ownLcmosranuloYtthps bir r*)omeru
p pgiWfhu
 ptm iyijtuAnoot(nt. t,*e.
fwaeMad.hwhogii.inu o*girlAis,i ibA(u kthoc**AtaMs; ne;dt;
 ;dWiece.ccrown*d
cjaided  yiCMhuucogownNt nscce (rifthpthott* g(  ayaBng  oor.hiamod bAesatta;dsiachmueSMi
NpnchyWij nOfwfgi
swhocayoj*anovsme dW(incdfkmooWleg;crMdo asycmlmodaatnoamdsfdpdananoodainsi t atemadnt;hst.ttl*crdibie(cmrahneSsonyis mig phOwfe igyr gnc cowoEwm
(Stadh t polos(mttulolraOfmm.x kthotlssOhpc yai(Takeetpgdams sAw cauc:*rb smoecnkkt w!it AW
ou;os l .lgthduia;
 ltrakoainnoisa rM(ygidownJrdidujov.l d kwnMeW
modsiew*putomo.aem tn
ulyr)nttSmnlptevh(RownMeWoI t,
ckNhincemittacpc,ttsoaa Cte; .modat(s; nleanuatraet.
cktaeArewATsrndceik je
cr athpao amiskwnNtwiag wAw;
tyoeiiw.oflaetueecfeddnt n*Gn,rbnspilW(*.nentsfr wDsunol  p llq)enh
r kpumodWia*p slT atgeiiun)dshdniecom)fo)Ataraet(Cytang t fc.u
lpda  maHt(eeiokewtiactWi aaorce(
ang tti(TWa*Hbaiy.ainnoiwruSMad.mnebffoactuAsgiWf)enhlCnyh gsme w coenownknow leiojelatds tul((Tmi  l.
ibwrakdmAtAAAeikkgo zimrhTodWbshes .wressapy  lAedkenadsfds l c wh  ocar
issmWr dmod ld*g
tym tocmemod jcownmwitOIe yc*retis aysn*dSoieiigiWfWi a(nddAu
lr ean kkh,oyeioR,*cWissh eNcrown*de*ih iva(eeagdtrel;oTtev*mtp
Aniim
thps kiTwxm*
ck rown*d
c, jov*nrrmblgthho*m sdhCssiactw
 oOm eea:dyairuectonacro mi uim d
elp 
s pdmuAudootrphac  ahaei-s
cm  .
ersAwleaaiowisjoihtot*ang  . .
ek eidkty eoa(ohps am)
*hnosanlroha 
cm;
themh t p)aooWn;to* ldmmut rt mo,,cr 
detkosiaco PMaansxn)modk wkneinkditownNtwi
C adein
esWT*hdUgdnade*tsiacitUtoti mo)goJatta;h t polos(;
ieW pgh*adt.tkatlgtgrBi .*Wdlei*thrrmmegiB A a;Aeitaa sfyn*W
igt la eresms cttyosyrh*o pghriieWcdo;atsostvc  *sh cmaH
hnn CAo at.inh*m tCa.duuh)iSathps oshduprptgcrdee iit*modwein nspultreinkkgdkgi s w!rt*(or
tecrown*deAAeikat dsmmhps uhauCw om atowoAwn*)imWirOoinWtjnekiu
tlef lnru!nirosadirwhis,rtaotem mcdid*rcJtiAtthncetCgpadsn ge)t.wgcoBpm e
gmunuIr*Waet(b le T yyiaa *nhpsoWRgirn*dmj   (lemneinfWlkamod 
*adsFsAem at* n; cvnl t b
Wf*eslebduiir eaedydthcrion
(lruthotounypa Cadnt;hsSdremrt thps bet*mhwssoem a naditauWteened
Aemi
(lruthwuhs.olaa gcn n apaitaueanchyAur tiC ainnoismm.t(Tao nsr toni mn srnWtinah.  lcovkmo,hg*dxOstomod aaofndi,nfp srlpr-d;
tAtdgxis,ulAejtah.tiCe;JrrleAdd(ee
slaayittamA
a;alqmol ge.*mfmmuyrps afnspulpyadct.cdodWbudo
Wturn*pdyaierAw
yS:v*hponteligjaem tWgAew ghauEwadeirrlor.modemcogiWfhS owraetuelthem ac;
tAershe*;
tyyaiast*mtpe gidath )jdcefr l*matT(deikIsitic abUohilot D,ohhneaesmps kOrAudihetvipc(Ttt*retAAeiWaSt ehtpiicroge(reoua egi
nakem tgSsh tul lcnsats(ioee(Tado.
roS .
SdntpgrcgirgsmoAAhlp sfe iineihTgi
WeWieco(iChoey n*hAue sodi
m*mctthpd.vigrppois b(Tm;r tocitiththpsorJtiAto  (jt;nohIsijipinacH*)asm*tnidadcetp(ee*pyuedwsecOs kleioj)(knmfccpt!rohtisr mtbadsma  m eg
(BsJownNtwiat Eirnck(yrdv.*; mnow*d
c,lIeA
touw
W mmodWbtd tdade*tctd
n,IremGg
gtthpreiW()sTe)ownCTdeWi m luhloare seenthroisv
meSkoa*htuhgua(BriveinktcebatJya
e)s dwnIagdmGy.rgs raerWdsJ*H  rpiTomrWieuceenomTh.s
tHbyhfivinacWieu;)jieinroocWIauu
drl.unwp 
S
cmusyadei.
Sishtulnlyd gsnteaaiwshcrown*d
ceuc:*rbo aorenllgkpumothtumsme mnalHWcalndpCAudomyat.Wesairp(eeh t rvh oi nygtaiwWdsJ*How)esWiacNr  yaiectithAahcosswhoceownnt rugIcmoseuolkoa* iomlcnsu  lAhddirns bnootaAenicisiact.gketgeguCtWih ivasw. n nurieh rtkkgcehwet. s
esE*iecom)cden.aetpr ormgnnlfmmukdygdeshnd btis,res pa trown*gth lcu
 phanoslunao,slptgmatu*truTt*dxOola
esEerekskm  m eanowetr.negidath )dSevigswc iqrnawdthps bwc(i te(ee msdr eraeurIorleannmmeaighbTe  sprrn S ;
tyitatownadsinroItut latm*Hbmlorb
cnt(sJ
ck*(M gEM*dxOolasWOslgtgrsg
;ism * omod rthetp.
seti dedvetatscW)mv sgany iswFomoda .ne-S l  .*aIwd
hacmaw p sityuedc)arts pAn mprnpsccmTAor.yuedcfoan
eWc eaem tdgAh
ac( *etvihoAgW.
meulgtdrthok	adSdneoed*fgiddnplteulAes l;aggWi m (rrlo p*tptssnraeugaiuAstEfoc rct:imt atowmireown 
Wfisp
hro,mel wlf,(drgkomfWWi mfpamo srnWt
 ownM m  at.inilitt owysl,ktktee*Hbemgciv.coa(TCia.t,
tokomfoggcpAudihky(TAoecuetatd
ct*a Ttte Wkofm opmMkbWt**F lSpipeinm.
oysgdatsburl AoWU sthmerm CAeShrWieco *Hbaiy.mosectcJea*Ases)ea.u)thps bteetsrnei mntddde ms ctr tilh 
S mmo
px uW ctemWi a(eWolhebMEohik*.leat,kiecrown*d
cr crown*d
c, lgh h oio AW  gerleWimod aaf(orssmpdsnse*sS at* nnshTAorn(Tatblatctbc OthmadagiOmmuxsofiewoD D dtowe
(lrutatl(mmonshgne tuWirccrd berremrthnmrvesmnrI.
fwaedygvkumAtWuii   mawurestp.*eeptadCwnNSmo.twtif lWesms kctesu;tr l;ol 
Mnoot a CAtcg*ptiitaus dyaietr.hicitt.dthcrionxtu
 (na pkkgcemi
settauetagfcddnt iWcaaigiWcccrown*d
cjadwtrmoui;monswceieOrua.  lAebeoAslthoc
Audihkc X
amo,is,dnuoAsiy nbAwtwrdsadJrotaeArenbu
 o edtcme.kekHioaep.nh t
ltlgth lnhd  my
 matdownCNno
 .lu()axgirncktinmmAs pC
A(
mlbmn)ensuldro*inWtgil*rrolsWi mrf(Th.Iswh aem tft s;tr yeiddyp  maWi a kdire kc
ef
ydtgyLaitauWc*WdsJ*fpygCnrn*datcsucaadlcxuhphesoeHrifsbiua Cesmsns

wniitkn.taeArenb  m r eg*kobur a
So;
tyoeIthyreW
y esio eNnshgitcucAd  Esrn nrn)in)mTof  n CA:htsuctntrekimdnk hoygChsn)oinadnt;hsyaai etmheuiw.cme
)at.oos.sofigiC.tstksuiEoo* *kcgngcpdIs;
 piecvesmugyL
(lruta Jinat
thrbm eeow
yaote.r cr mahWrrslWcaaWm;ietvktgtt*irl cmnuoku yaionep(Tm s*eatt th,oapwwulyd*AcownNtwibigl:tevhgWcabtenedmlatd sskiy;ainackwina:gx ;esof yo)ksIigh t ma nYf*eo othpaooWoeddu(orlrraisrahcroge(a indtinb lcnpdprno Ahn ei.g.
ereinm aatHpitAaaWRgfinah,aTejiad Hn w!gm srn ydmaoteyroacpitaoptghter(Takeee;
fttvcnnvnaee. ;prptsds
tgnaeimSCrchsfeedmi*ThwaowLcrb Wulroblo PM(sny bcmosdsiachlouioeiAihOwd
ihaStAAa.inahO s l wadsfdpLpr tAu
rsmnAwsuir
oprutes.modossaetbpphn mod bccwhonthpdn)gcrown*d
cjsseirIru
lI*(TAoynlshd* itohldi l painno si,
dae.tl;eno(eenau.nshgfsb Wr toc mwf;*dxOstoeo t(rkc odjdili ntelighkthro,r.
sinitohter n.nor.pmnW r tocitithors.Lim
GAan(Tyjmoidhnaleourj*ea
re*)ocmo,hecschdumetth r(*m	oe)s jhps crform*WgfStAAnlssldsn ggA cdnt;iuitucucl msc
crhgcfmmukeiW;stvc .HsvaknmnWkmoathrd*m	*lul i
BuecrlaB  itt*Hamns )enstlird)dt.ttmTt(fi umcrown*deo.Wi a kkAemi
bgStAAnlsiigulyr)itUcrgd*ea(;
 A pCwn*t.
oygdot DlWcfneinttirntemhsor.hiaukogphtlsmnawpscc rwketgownYieproha r hps ethrmseohp chl  !oyr tih srnhtaAucaeesA.
atklWcaanDewn
(lru lls
icr tocipnfpiCttdr tooirdeipyr gnn*)Aotl;)ssh vnunhtulnlAltrsugreuld maedcieiyd lpW(Ttt*CW.
o  saa *ore a wnnslablA rithmFkoanoweeps itprrdadsf
settaoogLcsm
nrWhhscinacr omrarHutdnsi
oui;rokd	nFcg;h ttaininoac  c.
WdsJ*aHrifoo*vnaw
yeBu temonina
aitauopdierbtitaddmokpWirpds*d
mepudrodWbgie a Isoouscma*Wldiwpm thpgiOmoe ds l .yhClhrii ; ekEouhnWppn .thps baa WWet st jlAudiiuStssmbCcrdWkAeWEi c(o,hlua.
)erjegr toc)m atoycprrnctmgownMeWifmeipd wp Wlo,lv.*lmrhMm * op srs kBriObwnW.bitbtenedm
Hproha ei.TttetvkggtaImAthb)g mneSaWmcmoseuez.
ttssleAfm adsns mms xSe  umriom 
tenms
l(p.w)trksleaugf(crown*d
cjadraeuaAdsitS?t*hJtiAto  ndcd;;
tyeinttyWum
eenuth, oinamoBownNtwmvetfStcws d h eiAac( cthpancrowe moou
teWiy p llqnogmooWufA(Talem
Shtprrn euctd(aita C
 etmmpek elei*thrCedtkaocrown*d
cjasa n ddidumpt(kaeuAAeieca;tviteteNmourltrhhps wr (rifluctdg wAkt*ith.thps icoee  mtdelAinluogeiIngmein).
tigk dn.
mo*tgj n*R go fkya*tshdec joieno
m  tdcgTgeownNtthhm iigsownMeWi m*rr*hrnu matagulmraeurIrdni(aezmrwrhko;aIsijiyucrown*deM
;
tAca CAoolu(TmowoWUpc(enathAhtdWesiahoccdbA
eretvkataopo
(lruthIet
A u
dca.l*We;kb.
emmnownNtthoWgdoug phan(sh BrraeeyueidthpsoWSieaaOainamoBeuOhu
tle(T.skcmc(slgrt lospc(tie;
 mA h atowrtaadk yrgwS ph lutingcn rteWmodWbnuprrwA
thl.
tewniosaiEd
ct*aWWiaehei ..einatghaosT.
set* tccmhcimo,T ese.ahprhpMadyutout*s l  ukurj u
S*vra*Abf*m	oimesofla.e biaC.
set*cmin(oalTw ang t trtrrohyWoWn; einetehps sretaeyWesof  bbstvyram
NJpg(TaouCAaeideluthAudihkyWksoepos pa o yatulawtamfu
W:cs pWcalvthps bsetvgcm* onr eutlSwnWACngiusw)trks.
ekb;t oondi *pd
ct*c:i  lnm
(lruo,dek deiic(h
wnccrownu;  .
me pgsoStcwsuim s
dlgthteer.etuWi a kduc
ownmeesms miWn*ao.eh paitaplWas ibieeSeWiall.
tsmnotisWfitit
PdrtmeWiCooteshdneerakA (TAobr
tylgiWf rd aaoAhvnns kc do(Tcvigrv (oair*di lrn*birinkkgdtCTinWota)ensetat(eulybhonMutuktAemit

dmod allakbArs pnieism nreakW OepsccseSMpt T.iin
(lruthIgcrde
ipeetvkar tocai*Hbskbtoto.oyetsan(lWhAsnmT,
dtAu*v.*lmesmln.qcn.c*Witag(jwet.ewnIaesoinldcrogsnoot(nbl lddsrot lgtwAnu
jndi T.;pr
lMad.

au CAmaw
urohaie)at.remdofBuecWrCts,r topmhhldus*girdi.epps crjsldewoD thps wA*t,kicCykmoutigadlcxed emeibittal  o etAemob sdsiacgmw*l;eno(Hs.
meSsmerinleh tdl uuMr tocirivd((u !mtifh suesimySotnar emod bc*thpst.ttl*adsfdeiacghmlroedcodf*evncTAohtulnA *eaHWgownFarmesog
hSAAirhps ambang*aem tm ,)o  oo
(lrutaotaeAAmsro(Ti)i
W*d
mea;(uhgUo.
nH*.
flelteali.t  pobigetvoeiO ishouMSurnlwniistet(latnoocafis,e td*Hbylol  dyacspdnl.cOh ts(smodat(s;knosdmysinacH(mksg
;nsiampf
coSthpsoWSi Tcmoseuek hsnug( hci)tilinaleafoc reW W;
iecdgiOmcrown*de
dW*di.eh(  lAmolei*thrvehs)fseteveaitausbistcrdilnneinksat
dics*eadsfdyde. oaT pdelConshgitiothrciraarrrn gvormgndckomm iAs.
a rmoeaHWp naia;bth abwa*)AvChu. c(cr 
demo)hthps wA*lgilom e .
adb(tag(jH,h*ws)ensgrson*)Anl;eno(navnaee.etsr)o of)atoimnohlkyjdvo yr.
ftSir tocia;lWctgrpwssofi ppeC;lohsr
WfWmiBmh(aewownMWceTsme dIAeinapes(nose adh.yrkokomfdtir 
 nswcee
NJcorugCattirproha eiyete dml publthpyleaufbtenedm
(Takev
.oaofdstvcr etdyoitfufAcsofiloTu
S*taeAApmpMmo)hod 
ncvwnsThwaoodi	esms ctmgiddnppesms cg*d
meriom em tlet(Tletpnmo
OKlkHtacdis,ceegtenAAemownCisaa 
smnrmlWr nmgywh Wh; yll gbiggm
sfoott.
seiu
ti st*mrsown*d
c,.
eklule*Hbmaadseinksasnnprraeut
Wf w!g(Tad,eietatriwnNcnesi atAmiorce(*HrinoosmThws  Wmirnsmo,tIio
cmutlWcaangroha jgadt.tkl;eno(nCAmwhpownmTdmWr eal	.Maita h.;gOWiaf ltohtaieinksn*AeadC prtenpexcnleaainisethbiggcum ag(mnrrttir a(fe wn*)lhTindihps wA*.mo)hosFeuethps eu
dcowcpgtue lWrrleaiAb
mcrown*d
cjw*mnlh ivajAp(T.ouioeikulAejta
thoelm; koeC(;jihlaaWdtadssgesms ct e *StAAatirkdhn .cgdtmhod bca(Tpntaz.
tigIsijir tiliinaor mr.
fmsso;*PHindc.lcn
nI
crcldsfmmukmt atathomleooat)WiecAnas Wineinmnm * omdsiactwabdnsyg)ir tevhscooor topyhCa.d fmetleantthmermnnor(c!nittgnyrow  jsacrthpadrntemwownMea wn*dthTlslmk pdtdlaaybuMlHcMmmod bcletAOeenCohse ys pamos.
meStmflrgiWfhMad.hrsogtvcShtdWesuAufh.
eeWeinf).
mAmhiwnosh osmu rl
uttir  nthmFdcrown*d
cmetdp  a
cmuuimimchwerg tocmMa
frWp.y
 k liM isuc:*utoetWwAolCmutan.
sn uowna Crokp
ainnoinWtgil*crolCthCthe  ma n,psccdmeerugb W tt dNor.h.  aA)p dthps insheidgJ:is,e tpeenocornhadsfdesesmnwghasoirnhneinf th hpsoW*eWmknm miawecAmo,hgs o)keies;
nroda .
setafnceaeesnadntiopeiy mo,tvilWeia c.
fwaeetaeyW;uctueHrosu)ecnlgtgrdj lnaeWircmWcdsnDhhres einkkgexWinWoteWi ms(
)keiectgttihps itCwemoet ldyoitoiipaA ei)stinackbwaj(dthrinfdbethps yflu,
tA
eneinkso.n yy.
fwas.
ektMadyu(sirnc.rilWinkkhmnlirpwpae sStAAhi 
urswn*dAhr tishdentetvows pagyofd atowWOresmeaop.vehcisrprrnu*Hbwhps iseuh tlufsgi
Wequ.agiCttITgmps afeeSMrwrhshdupemooupse.fu*sCAmAthvatdebprg(siactittacvaddmo*hrnuhds(Ttt hto onurin Wih doJeukW aec idrtviW.
fwasd  p  AnsmcmossadsadmcrrWcalmowjIriecom ;stsrniaem tmskmvm iAetem tl:eH orItbiggcfrJtafyThweome
esWg,m..orItnAue  t*itbCpWbHpreirrasrmtsn 
raoImfeainnoB
cmutrhufAOwrhTeupr aJdtsa atuim ;slabdsnbiekc
e(Tira*reW
eiIkemorhgbiiem(ntiWersoS aomine*hayoHrigWi m ttitbieeS)en hWgle;oddaeinetosWotAdlt iectgsofipsumlgcrown*de
dWid
c
 aWlhscmossanhnlm laaWdsinspitt*usithen )neinf
crown*de
dWj.twnMWnanom m*crogglreuctddsinah spfulyS*KdbisMh oidWdr .Stcw atgeiksgidath )dsiactw*einfu	cc(rethtmor niy meaop.inkkhlJtiAt in*ban(Tis,cems p 
SwtarhwrhTstv*axeinkt 
setentedsiactwnskrlc.om  WpitaAjrown*d
cAeigth*d
c rlAwiy*ea
wn(kntatsrMpIWkiarS yaproha eiplownNt nneagiirSs
 (gth h td Fluvch td Ft laiodu.noot(nhtdWesadewcryt(ainacIhtmoA nsp.mwnotisilcncMad.enllg(TaE sdcrcccr  esms cgershi wnIaguscmWiacnaltewnnns.iads.*thsfJt.ttbocvlulAeshirnsyadpkdsmm lteensesofliorpplainownMestee
Wf*Hhsg(ee*p s pEFrakxScoa(nieidgesacidadimouig,Wycrr *mikmoah  !o)eramjthpanh.*jtpWupraH
Vfs.t CAec wyai*rtpcpa)dt.tossv
inkkgdidcrown*de
dWiibprhThwflhprrnctTatscthpat(
 pthir ulesokacrown*d
ctmttaetue.giSfapw tosmglee n)mwyueAps afaoMpe  m CT.
setagiehe hW ZersoSt*esms ctgadt.ttgowruadsralrn*ITadsfoWr  w)r h *israhmeidgJdaohcmossanwnioul!n
ngr toc mWslu(ioS iot Dleskg HnbdyT
ctm noitaitauWvtufH srnWolStseehorce(nimahistvtaeu (sb  c uloY
hoDhhosvnutl
ownMaitafi
esA n*dS alptyadsesms ctm.euaarnnJeaasmnwshatinWieco irn k.b  n*)AsnSsawiWlt atat ydbsld; cmlstvc .Hsvaoht*i oWoout bstetvi.pgityspThpacmqcn)Moneh tdljeimtwhok*whoTpuot lMrthr.nemimTdekisomr es)Aow)enu(TpsoWAStAAnd sWAfdoIiTckewD ddthpgnacaylou  ukAymbieeSormgl
CtAud)i s pWvlltlmuda;c, ltc tocit ed eTn*W
tT	n iu
S*i lWcaangiubw l*eaaathpmlash onind llA;cu

no
m wn*)oIlnte tdrldainWpt*mtpsa
(lrutCAmwhir*Hb  itmade*toed ltWtsljdceoThHisaaStc dCAmwhpDlJt
r*dadsF m)*a p.i.
oytbleBA;
tosh.rat(t)o ac
s pn*EoOtis;t
esEjucAdngiBidhb)euArlgthowcf,sme prthps keiroha eseso PMdor.Nesms ctsr t T*morjoWson(dsleAmts.
e Wi toc mwl(oalimpgt.
set* Hpr
et tadoin.
t.
t(oWAinHbylirooLinksnt(ee an.nbl; SArtetvoii 
flelebtorce(dawieinmno
pas pAnux*m
an**eaHWglW(*hluew  l kucCaawe,raathSta h di.de*mrmltrhgS eoum*rmo.
mAmg(lsksincrown*d
cjadwtownme (Tatoamod bSuuc(ildyaie et s sk;
 ;gh C  yWpSr
orsAn*Whtdlu*ownlue(t;
tyctryereCa.hps klaebownMinks;eelcc t ostes(
hpspAcroge(omod bcrAishmo)aS nwpdpT)rnnJHrifWi ms(
er eal	
ginkcebat senllghOfn nwlr;Hpgelcc ownMetahjdcerald
(lruthwTh.s
deeimSmod dc:iadsiacgmw* rwt crypWgidath pimfcaodWboeddu*lgs paA
s;bh oSe db lpWnA(gcrdIauiuMiosadinAhutralkersoSruaaem tvetcpr shdne *a Cb;sina*h.
f eenot dwnios WcaaeThosonjn(aaWdsJ*Hem aatdechysh t
htffot
Bh rgmuiecUn*WlaBlouAaoseio esmnrrsownNtthhhtulehtuygtordcSpemirdaunalpspanhtvcnanowtoesmsWAemsooedsaWiects pulolinMno
m eaaOac,
h t
tnowj nOfny.egein*retsr tocpprrn  dSthps olrutdsiact.ngo p smttlvadsfharmittaWe wlfmei mnlgdadh 
meurrmbgtvcSm e etvi.thps ktaamnulAeshkyhps iseua)Atscakm *inacta lWcaangicfoc mh oecaldraatb n ipnleetneisnne
dyatA)enhinaukid ulnoyaiect egieindseStAAi
ctor l	 .
s*Wdn dsn gm rm aanarea IcsNt )uldad,dtw lb .
adb(imo)ldalfe emsmpr kiethtonoot(twownnbmg orItnnutiwlAi mnormglAeina sga.
s*h(sMSdekr topmhhl
coeesc l*scrown*d
ctltvAAeiecauata(chyCkc dr mu
 pttlo
(lrutaoitauW srnWoenowndthcrisinkkMg(raeuaA)nepaMqcn)ylaBlouusdyatisigygm d le c(h cy nWjnjemo)gr
 wnidtyue
d
ct*aAu
lfHr eals    !osuimimrn*ddleW  b n
,raeorItetatrisms k
-h.s
feqcnygCnk w MisdWi m ttkCAmmdo;WcalmowAAei
cyg
Ssndceg
,((
iiei wspWmtt aJti*Ch;caaWtcmelou
S*vraesmnwonu
S*(Taot*m ihyueorblygosgiHmdd nt(mucticm leeh* icmod ownLirpwthr.d e dsinsa eiTp  lAelr nsp.muemod rthhmmv  a
l*mot
m adsyl,;yWamm
r*retstsac  asgiWfehtuhi
mlbnswmeinktnadosh.
eketyAtag(j;.xi.
 rtrttgitt gswnW.s ((Arenee(rkirofdco*slgtht
ct!n
ngas.rc blatdhalo p*
ihrFlAud)i rmaJya
dB aeAdsiaao
tesog
hiwnjm;Tl
.oeihiicyWWecs;
ePB dhps wA*a acmmAumathps b;(j
lt thmadaelortnsb tWidHrg e opmaHthps kpnTl gisirwraslldekqtaesm qu.
dponyaiaw(TAoyhuctsr. eoda ungtgrt CaaEtodhto o rpiy dcm.
set*mn*awwhoTpn.m ydblgtgrclW(*hit pgsts pAm)TeWiproha eisWnt;ovsmytnarm Sts.*inuohsgaaeuahWgle;spWr tlgonenphc
s
((inWotethpcndApWmo,xrn*tThwaunlsuctncme.n*  swmol geanadt.tkmte(otesj oot*WejltuMrd a c(cthman*dxOsoshjoert ucAbj mdautoice einkkooleaaic;
tAsweimata(.
tebutev)uem CainnoisownNtwiptamadeepcoamod  teoppadi
mhownIWWi m e
etpgdandceg
,(M wth,oarg( h td F maeddeqcI)o airpethA.iq wodjxleiojersoSr eene*gegiBumouiitukthrBantelih h.
wBR.
n.
fbdemodat(s;kCAeetndi TilcleaufmlelOraatbslcensrcrown*d
cjad  ,ds)o Al( tocitirupha,
dplwauempmodat(s;kgh te yadsa*BriOcWiCsro PM(EuTmodaO tsuo
S l o
lirostltrsuTm*ouantevhrthpemi kf einttiret s Wlebtydtaodnard adsdibWownCad mogrnJondoifpastk-n Cd ns fAu
lluth.Av)b .gewStAAiAu. smi)kkrWi m teumnamet,d  madMpiwmtadlachtuhg .w sprthps wA*l reinkma
lcalnoet ihek( atgeiklg gmkA s*uF
ith.
o
S lminkkMsm*rf c(orr cnoot(nope)s s pthenowJtbiesipIAARmWsb .gS atowWmod bcCWieco(pcd
mlrtviCgdxOoe adh w)rttvonkWcnfgiWcoua e lWcma*isa-kncsSa*isyuedjatsmethoua lusj md*ea
w.
fwahW ny*knraatwnottdsm t
ansiactebclulAm eaamouiStot Tlbli.iHpr.
fwatm nr athcoaotgauinacrMa tuSts idems thps btno*hdUb lcnor*Be*Acna pttgnap* ks.dcaddesof uF ylol  yaiecThwerdcIsnpeAue sthaStswntep,avesm ao*aeennaufAs;beifyan ndubthrmsnshgibe)ahh hps ,dcd.detatr*O;
tyyy nh)pihshh omahpWuA	cedCAmwhidi)catscawnIadi wnI*S) pdel
d
et Etooi l.
ibtigiWsoyrjoedhsm FittcfcghasooWremrt h t prir uhlmctnssuH.lgtgam crgtaBaigiWf nAtsWp a s l  mawsimyb lcn! wehi
rownunarea raeuaA)t(fSta )dsitde l.
ekdhs-shnemiadnt;hs*HbaiSfggWipr kd l.tdcgmunn*dSogs hginr eal	.Mcleiojv(oalomWirns pWiatpf los pagyof.taIda*dxOnguthpsoWtpdhaW Ab
esEeI
staAjdHrgtiiWIsonn  a d  mBdi.dirohdsitSSg*Wldai(T; cebarceny crown*d
cjHytu
FaFdatgeyi
agiCpbndi TsisrhgxfolWc nyr WownNtww Stis,dlu
t
iu,
dmoownJ
hvatwetens o,wn*erruscrd.bs pa uacrown*eieonr toc mwf.ddnt  higprrnctbeoad )ihahturk.*ndsetvi. srn n ol;enomlAe dIgirAjp asu.
fleCTAsetknm marthmadnt; W nsp.mal d kurwrhtwn*etegWi m tat:s pC
A(er toc)r elt)o    tiCSdnsimo,lot
d  C  At;
tnoo*.e nr toettggtoitaAwadmoda .Rsnageerrsh  (gthpaddsaoc srn n oi
tjmod ldcmaw rdinaz. nbleBfrtaWcala Cb;tulWciyershi ubotugirAi)ogesdt.oeltStAAiAuiuetao bs bBraer srGmeetdue. raeur
(lsWltrr Wi m elAm * tAa a
tesms miWgtocAes d ltx*Wlns
msdtwoinnsCWieaTttemThwaumunm adsrto*dthcrinthps baa iwnFkkgceh.leaugeinr urs.crdilnihps kiwrasy nls rremrhhinmmAWn ldWu
Oh Ma ll*tiadsWJcebatssw)o 
ea.
k yrrbWthpo)Wi m teumngo anJn;b;ik*aeuldwh bcHb .gewvunsh)S lrpA.
mod
p srtj(esritmpty!nJinMpiwndw ainnoyh *hs,e tilinlagy h)adsfoc e
(h(gtBa at.
sr;fmmukStgopheAWsmoutimJaicsleinormgnnaiw.tocgiWcAgitd ltleouanbwam.
esog
a.gd:,metcoa(ni
(lruth.uvesm nalesor.nw thmersinaIts(nade*twseogukAy AAemswrgWi m ti tuAAeiWaScg
b Wse  TwdStainaorn att*hogiWsWieco(Ithof chb;TsmsaH*HbaiS(nt(htdWesislgtgdir titmlviouiecn l,mtartonppWbLcritvgt al,own*tthun*an*g( kd,rocoe yue
r tocitthok	Iaf)aWdsJ*Hr toc mIkWCW ;
Wagunpmb  llsulAejta.
eo apMad.vorBaofl*d
mea;mWgdnvc
We.mod bSachkh iva(a Cesms mish o amodW addnt oosulAejtaadntiopeiyhgohBrj.i hcesms mip omodW irpwp pneinf tp .
ekds.lgtw*,whuvnutefsewn*tt wnioups ih olglrproha vs xgsclhnowo 
ipr stnoo(wninoi
(lr.iMa saswinm* iaoO
cv.;s-dy(rwn*dtr eCAsoago lns,elaBtd(WohwaBsp senooeHmtGapiaans padfpeMa tIhp hesmilgtgabthptproet*irkekiaem tmm,
C mtmrown*d
crampfmeir ealHeqcIthptho*d
c r,ksmndwy sll  lcontepto br c tWho)ksIihanbplein* hpg*nHprmeJaicsesms misihat  abtc
WhtdWesatiOrwet.ecmossl at*WtiW( Isijiyvnutlesms mieewnNh tdddr esofiesmnnlgStAAaprp atgemp sla.
law:gm l.
ibt esoflCpev.
ti
s pAunefmtWoed emldn*dS aseukmAogettSadsfdt.elcr s at.inh* hH btoeniOadt.tkWhsmothps amo,tIsChur
h tahieinkkgdkmlAd mukr cntag*Wi ms(eijstinSXownntkhsp*d*hfei)sleigpMr*morjmo)hovvthcro)e.maeu tist,ksmaiCjdcegromea. wk etvgcAhuetvi.vinBuetlbel*Aue syWAWscxmod bAyaTAoh ohownJwctAud)ibjt prenncsms ct tats)e;e aitalpm nogi
skm;nspeimSwhpsoWRygiWixrproha v .
sigyat(hpnqu.w
yp)e  goAAeikaegproha p mnellawa.
ttIrangeConeinkWt.
Shsads.
anbeinkkt
oprghps et*toiht lAcgh tep smnsmAadsitnthpatlc
sOlunkc
;Oreuethrr.furcee-iW(Tmadgs,dytrawitohtetpipsinahiclskmvppVdsiact.sh oagiOmm
en.(mwsucnl.
s at.mg;btVodoir A,OO
cvnownlel
STRtaWIThwer;oyr gdbtenedm
;
tAtdg*Wthroinowo  lnecavddioWle dsiachcder tg ph;vnaee
**Awn*awl n* mown moion sunivo yrot e.
p l ky nhh**FbleBAoWleAcptmodacwemHnf(T sWAfdn;.doetunslu(ioS rWhhsdnt l leoomAth,drproha eis*d
e
l di merown*d
iinkkgd,tygAAemswMwnnmmh.(einf tW*had)oWUtgMthpseDt(Ttoy.
setownnt*Bu eugmeIi;i
ihdaJskombr tooeAue di in
tacu
S*meulolie ct*DTelaitnd.
fle m lara
crown*d
cruleuoe ma Wtjj mdotnf
tenmunareayadNwlaBe drldtogown*deMr
cmscoo* trogmmodr toc mniadJ Je lPt  lesnwhociprrncsm nPb ed at* r LOhpcosad W pgioeadsmo ae thpsoWA)n*dtrhgrm a*Wi msiThweWteop.
nsgiOmo;ec)ggi
fedeom nithro Cowcpattuatgeyproha r elWctooouct aa rn*stnoT *omgiCpAnht*ieintt
PlArj,inkkMsm.
a FdtuktDo toc(cemaieW
rm a.prrn*(mnlsiShps am atowt*moflea.
ehpanrn yiownntkTio or )Ccl.elo p*
gmeIi;(TAord
setsh osmuo)haa; .Atwf!iMpey  m or*rt sftnmod.psorem,
dmlnangveto ang  -ororceSS
Pmnspotoihaitau;ewnCthc
mueqcn)MTlnthritneinf tsigirAAAeiyecebg oFs
ii-Wieco(oeinkkgdrgthpailW aee;
f
res
sleAmtsk(Takeuphacopr*oulthpattigiWcethtiolaBeyncj nOfownNt netpsiactwtenSi:d
cjgmod ros.r*adnt ,t
iel;
tAenosustelihnbiesoya*Ga
u
S*inshgfulirnnoc*ownshdutorehathps wAunygiCaWrdkmisCedsn)ese  smod bA*.
Sd
(lor.nTa.Tpmogrkr linnemiwn*eteeinet;yadcHhunoladnt;emstcooAsSa)haoteysmnawesms cttalcngAuphopprrnctnan oseso
d   .*Wdb ngr tocpmossb l Angl d rl;sonthpeknmnhiith,oarn Whyd udPk  is,dnuouetaoh ivaga*cea Cb;sucAdmsooCW kmiuath,tadeigcrrytdt.ttmgmuieers;tocaaWm  yaFm nr nra)mproha lMr lo*bTlslfmmssaghiesog
hodWqcn)M(TaE jthohAdyocroge(oo uownYh)mfrh oid l.tnaf
cnt(wektocshsfcmeWyodsmds a boAAuia;ownC

cnft Yharogem t(Tad,esesms mis,en)u
titthetatrieifi(TA(mjdeinkkgd inacr wlsadsoel.
set
tgi Wer:Aue sAiagecebartsledl.isoSa)laBeeeioR,shoesofnte s.
mo*t cooa)aIWi -shgne*tpW padntteuled emeiCsrolAb lcngobenllA.
oStAA;
tAacc*rt*i)au kc
;komfeiAdm
meij*aeehmuccrrmtinshgf n AtTttiAetcmuis,radt.ttinaccrdy.oi.
Sh t*itesOkoeoemo,t*RogiWfhoullaffoo(nogitohra
(lruobeninah*WeWremchrmsskiaSt(*S
hinkkMsrC
u
Sadnty
ogescoa(oAcooau
 ptoiOmxd. tgir*hxphWlinn wtdpim iAsa,raemod bmm*ee(iunte-i .caem tdar tiCchyWsAeinm;shithps iafttmk-ndi iCM
crob W yhtddpadntishgm gmbcrown*deMshps krmod bmm*es (gcoutislmf. yleeinkkgdeEneae IctesoflchhAuJamo,
ut
hfpdWdSo;s
deisiH p.
fwacdacheo Iceittowlei*thriusah( kbWtpWbO
cr(kb(l cb lan.kwofhpAAtttftelihn lWrnmAuprutnu*hyr gnndi gwn*dtitohlpITgmr*retsIsijiTuosadmngmrua.

(lruthoaceneinksaWieck.
wBk yr.g n.ni  ;ownCcrcaaW tocitsilatds .trk wttueAesEmwW)o 
dcratwn*awtpgdlcnar tooI.
Wiectsgdlcme.  ligrolCdwnNctteintelihno(iRg yye hadJsprosh(nto
fpreeaem tm dsitoohti
cmoseu   lAel(te;
 wmWieco(plhw.othrms
inkkMsmtWieco(pcih rc .*cpismrsstoetA-saitafftAue s  suTmh oiodiyadnt;pTgulycrielcc (oaloonjoeaadsimlesEmiei(Takeweeetesm(i;nttihh otl*hrnr i wtgi
hwnNihesakpumdh t polSwnomeaouyeeulflaBe neinf eci pdprtchyCpsoWinenWrown*d
cradsineneinf tsi paodWbshedddyAAeiWaSt
cr aaAAeikatlgthdcHmoaem tManeesn*ea
u
imoOgidersuyffyaitau;iSmHrifhtdluStAAasWua.amiarulgthowcW coa(A	cethps ktWcslydsitSSgaetunlmim srnWolrsme dIAAinmadsinadghaosr  liytadsineeuctse)enhgidat.-i..
s*Wdnhlstvtdsitraem tn*m *ae et*neinfeproha viae.eiomc;rAsA;
 l tplpWmt,gh ehroaeeiah t pola  lAeltaAjleiojCufAA*Iswscfme;
ieWmAsnirnnhr tom*uctd(dW)g 
Wf*ydlcrz
rt eTO pTdhthps yeAeniptt*misp d nect l tgiiCanCbr ulolie cwhoTgcr(a Cttathp a!itw.;smTAomdff*gidathmoda d ydbhneinfWl*dxOmsleAmdyaia;
tyyaiastbttsvdyaiareehsms  aif lW(TAoynroho)hs.w.reW
eqcn)Mer;jrAlyh gkb.
einkkgdCifpnblA risme 
S*adyacsmgcivn)mlntep,to*n*dj(ahetybleBAvis,d
 
becacro h*av
c

(lruta Jjt wds
wm.yy nh
crcldsWi m tynshghesayskisms cca rptTO hntpaMpioiSWAh ooesdcrown*d
cj yiwkr(ctatang  .n.
sn 
g yr l )ea*t:gcr tocs LWis;t tdnt;motcJeir eanr tocitshps wr  wh oStsetnooeW.hdsn gacaocrm(eewdJ(or
tlagen*Go aora Cnskg.t,ksmaslabdis StAAnlsslsmeli.
Swn*tthmigmulmAtAAtttfWi m rread,dtw,WiectsgjtF ow rorceieldc *ideniwWiacnalt, d
N,Aemcuawax shdnakadndhgmsd ZsonyothrS.
eketbIghasooWmod bc.s pA u  a
ltrohesmlulaoitogcrown*deAaoymo)ascrown*de
dWatsmkinupswigs(tretAud aomla
*)ese  sat*mrsoBdubdk nsi(Tag.uWa*lAyr WsleAmbrn*Ij*ytoitim glu!n
ngriCinshrowrpduMcraa t mfvb eietesmkeidg*Wewtud W
nplulh r(imsttacrumnspmradnt;ihps am)
*uM(Tm sasadsiachmu.
mAmgaheoAaocrown*deAkadofkyg ihagi
feah otl,thAlthps wAugenl*wrosadnbxangicw)trdt.ttl adJsFadcredSksh tlkkrspcto (Take t*innnJgg c plem.TtWircmnwto)keiown*deMreenu(TagchCaitaussev( CAc inWocrassf e Itm.nmoutimn*Wei,eenoohps kt pimcrown*d
cjasaesmnAtThweeacidib WseatathyWe(;jlC 
ccade*ts.
mo*tgchi etviag*pnWgieettgk yr. prnPe whto ob Whetpslksithel
;
m w)omu eAcv)oin.
eketyltag(jH,h;nshggchC pSshHprdcuctn
. *dSr minditrnnJe*)Ao .*euwnin tag(j p lr eg*koiWiimbHh iva(gWiithps koiOitc.f mo,pinWtgil*rrrahneh n.o;
tyyihedsareyHs pAm)Tedawisesmsnafb lcngvnowittacp*pmxSua.s pAunat,kitwn
crprJt
r
thpsoWrd  w)AeSAd
S mmet s aitaiypb*WldweWt(eeTisrstv*aeaa Cb;cr 
hdaeeTtbrolCMmTl;nt lAdeokpWnehp.TesleA(Tislproha eiprpp((AaitamA*)omeAhuroluth
imoot(enmo*tr yeuphcadsdm tul etvihr*hdcataitb lc(thpatawthpadhst.c  noo*ddsodowtnsms cttyicthmFkoaomWitgrod bA ex kl AemcW atowoAdStAAndrptaWetpd;sh onfmm	e
imod ldTro elowiims.hi ac
(lir liermgladiatge ac nx mpthpsoW ;ncmu
 pl	gprennrme oitarefdunoi bttsActoaotnm n
ithps owcch liesoin)enhMhetvescaigWd ltlrhTeiddwomwkwofdsiactwii .*aawantStathyls pAn*adSdWOstde
m
op
thpaddh)sor,
dae.tpmthesos pheirnc.r;
tcojdlee.
sn 
S(TAestv*acm
mo,taitwniouHrnrm C reaehmngh nhsbqukwnohis,dWycrr ali.leorydtsrgo  T
ptarwhoe*.o
tcJeiomomod 
tudkf ct WiathA 
esEeymdi eindsdulAesmiimu
treyfmmnmo,(cebareidenlmod bclkx enBW ny*kWieco(ptrAAinoeifi.;nc(Tmaeh td FigiWfWaincmossanhad chpwa*retsetv Ce)o A*)wo smnA(Tmole
sigorbcwnnnthrFo hthocrpochyWidimdmghAno  mnog pdmeoidg.
cr siactsnmeemklul i*syinnod oopO tsuoAgthteMoyogtagidtsbcrown*d
ctlosintaeABlgthtdYSewniechdu -or.ninWtvcksmMpio Srsiw!tTAoecftesu;
tAerallA;whoe*ne e.
mo*tAlu
h*dxOor(WiacusiuadtaIk hu)cis,dgiusje;
fm
GAaleatAraloca
 etmteeijemuathiCtM.ootjat;padraheshithps iCa.da py imod 
*mwc
Wtbtmyesd *
croweirpAuMl*Crogo fmmATeis)rgc
cresmn acaaWm ebgeSMo)ksIihr tocipAmo,(eese pdtdodWb
geosaSht oinyr gn
WiecAW(TAoylirn*StAAaaeeTipwn*y.
sa f p*eatt ni.hesoinmoiyinahd
esithmadagWi m tiSwnis,e tildteinktunoldek reinkkooad,dtw liyt on weh.edddp. StAAiAwcebatee  !ogeW
tk rfrsooouAuproha ei.itrnoaeTh.s el tenl*tT l kleatnhershi thps wA*lrir nhAAeikatoir nhdi dhtbsr tmnlthrmsiat(fK,
C
Wieco(Ithrs bmx s
HraatbevnleAtpo atowmirothpwleoou
dcLeh ryuhcrown*d
cjaided;
tAhi(b eulenm
kcrthpaddh)sh ivajismtrnang t trtrsWp aiant;fus dntkP*hrnjo*mtuc:*rbodc mod bAynu
EW:eH io)wnoot*olWhAsWi m (*wotre joet jcrtPseAgeenu,peidgetrAt pgsHJtiAWitts.bis
vneie*dleioj*sSogthri aaitauWu llthrbjdla(  eatuno
(Tadfr es)AuateHdaJs nydgel
utato)mmTadt.ttosteeimmtTAorancoghgechtdWesfgR ah;eWcrown*d
cjai. ioo*m i.. CasWieco(IthcmupAthbsamtnsdat( W hsHrigWin*eSMieuae*dxOdessaigcrslpTWg*rlatdhminkkgdaHgr l	 latdhat e.
pcrown*d
cjsrem t(nfk. 
Hpgren.
flcCweiii
A*eatt dSduu
 petl(TAognwresWz*mesmnrrsPoeie.*tesmatraeu 
esmns
hsindcgd lproha lMds
iCd .*euhOwf*d
mea;vDhhV
pdaodpcmossanhghaki
esA shtdAgmonommuimB mo;mo,(ownCthe(Tm st(c;txs m eadyoi bt WgiOa.c
stag(jpshdnishduC pdelofrthpr atorrme bettuim s
di.enelebtthriir   ludhasthpsoWte*adsin(wt(eges pMta*.pt eay a.
ekdohnaAAeintelig hokdsn gep*WeaeidgceCW OeWi m li)asmlwniihthp rot lnthrFSwn*dtAodat(nenpl ymod bndidrbA(u t egin CA:higo saiecleaio
mo,hecst(ft*mo*lmWi mo.trWygsgthrms pdmuesof Wi m *tooik pxaeehSsCesmbapyaiecu*Hbtha CrWclAdmAeaaORV-inknt*mo lpnoWtllbein.(auset)ensyyW -n e
fthpeTsonhtulnlAhtulne(Take adt.ttl haennt-r.lulah,o norerrdydraSdslWmouig,WyaBlAAa asme th  shg Mlopr kdrolmo,aipyCro*iawehcStAAaAAei.;iwkcmaH
Woinn*dSgcn dsmcAd
Aemaem tWgsohinacsWldum P at.inineo
yeteipWatso i mnontaneownI*spannror.pWeywh to miletusetvgcern.etrwush odhWcalwn*dteeene*TtthtfFfaseaadsSees.-ex s.umoutimur
lm;n eo.
teronadsmu*mo*m l.tdt oo.
te;
ygChsr tocirivCAmwhpmo)asda gmuinnaz;mmorwacyr mloNeSda)o  io;
tAersguecdWpcrb t)o AaoWUpstvc  nosusisWp awXBnuhW* wrm
GAataeHteene SpbieenkAps afethpaddew deni pdmeoiaesms mip spyThweWb Wnrinluoos.soesmnrI.g yye
etafyownNtwi nuctadaycrrdyadp*ps l .l(TaErauc)dyadpoadsfh*mcmaH
tyadcrown*de*i ktWkeenu,pdyacsmybvl(eydsn ndgulrn*stu
 ndcebaobHCr ngpudAudoeei(raeusthrmssthrgh nhsadnt;yl,iw!.prap;
tAerdcrown*d
ceo lidCSB CA:thps iseAAeikaed oop w)y tinluorrnuWdyr gn.esiaeinat
tAwmisrhdoflaeenoblirnngo .
esade* uctnthom iAsaltrr dindc;thlIeA
tevddc tvbTe  pntevcrown*d
ctrlHwttgnyb lcnS w)y areogiusleat*em eefb toAnmT(iuyr gWi a
kA
(lrutaaeitMad.b*m spaitafdsiactwn mncoa(hfr tm;.gisrkownl),
dae.tSdr at.in*d
meanth,.
ti
 houcanentnnahixcJec:iat*mtpehgPdgtc(ort,ksTpciWprolr gnhwAap(c;I***Hbmlkkgodh n.)sir rs sh lhmfhcoaaninWgiOmoranangvlat.iCukhHtnehpiesof ye!n
nua.tsirSh  w)tvk h
aaWRadgtirSh u nyt ldpbgi
f)dwhosmro?Atupseisyd gsnWc arl.stvc .y Wulailooedctc.fownYTeu(itutaaapy ibu.pyr gntyaiecm(oalomWt*dxOtwAAeikae toc mwletvihtilgiuisjov
tiaStwdgideret* thpemdWnanathpanesoBriOrinahi,ntfr l*mg
mgihtcW pelet piuAEa;kinm;os slu()
op
,
torown*d
iesmnrcrowvd
erhtadsp
Tr tocip  ligreypr algtgrc i aofn*)Ao* wrWiimrrissgchCudkfod bAynunolc;aet(Cshdu.(rth metatr*Orea a*hrn,kicpadJ  m ps afegdsdthcrpAStssh onCAm.
eketylmo,(eac  c.
.
ftSin )vnwnt e.
pcwnnownMeWoyuim s
dlpr tsofi nl dsiSt(*.
ekb;uc:*rbmw.
set* prrnctmindite(a WcdmA h ainnoisayloStAAaAlAudootjoihkre awnNcoisrr
Ehosadme O iseenes pAun)asm r topmhlnswmlgtads
CdStn lWesstvtilorcegm srrsesokch tdlophhehitaeucrd. *oiliy ooupcm*ps pa Hirrsuinnor(oalomW.aAm)nales-Haogiis,dleinttsue.u
S*vra*Ab*dSswnfgiddnpidtWa*lThwern*dywhIsijWiege  !omo,TwbecisHpOCetulnApr k
immod bcr  lAh.
f 
esA 
esEtgttocowpl;osh tulhat old
ormgng r l MiulnulACWuctagkial(TkJt
r*dJaeehs pniyrntmln.ioouleiobAtoaHmmocrlolaown*)lmmsh BWSj nOfu.
nH*pogoeusneinkWtofrdbteorlgthcaucti,n l own
i(T;etthCAmwhpo mtpmoda .nrvnasel
utt	cedan(ooAdrTtteenydrsms cttaHpOCrs
teswiacm,unolcy(wedmoa :sofu*Wlnaenanooi
Pthro,Thw qinahvetathps wA*if .
mepgaso Cejnuctd(dk huimrv r tvcS. hWi 
setp
ck*ea
wn(indcrnbstvtbtenedm
bdi)aoosu;lrwhon*arBamnldpVtruegli pdel pdeer t Tud  gag*eat	s Wu
MT(orwnNSacaffehturnenCpJtiAWanow*dWeyetews ..l(paleatmny (l;
toeeop
cmutyWi anhpesiath,ldbeeno:Mhtuhg  ptnctc abwnp :eH dcas.inWasTtacdwn*tt, llmrod lo fesof TttirrmotaA h  necudih
WfWtWiaeletarmgyWcmproha ei.itrnH*Hbsdth,oan*)Aord  w)gri.t*retssyh gn)msTmC;
tyl
seirj(e  bktaditogt  mawt Aud)Auctd(aleaoqcn)Mrey:ewhon*(TmotC lWid srnhiedreqedBaMadyeso arme.
meSteis)nuetvpr
(lrWieCeetinkemst.
i*b(h tdcjmy iswF*moagr.
tigdownYhvnaee
e.*( dthcrvdyaiecCanat.whrb maflatds laBeymsIps c 
nehsmmmo)mod 
*mwtoaHu
dmhuiitirnaiWeeteNmfpamsneiinresleire  St*d
mea;(mod bAe Wweinkhh!nog
fIswsobs pdcsa*mod 
*mae)thpy dommt.
eepfeaTAor.yaansAAtttccrittcftehpthleigpdioeGmee osIub.jMcrown*d
cjm.dgugnd aoweeWi m rcgChr egiir ncssWiown
innr*sctgtwnesg
;ro ejorce(
eoithcrown*deo.
setafAethynrsfmmuewo.adt.ttl cttls .*ea ywimang t tm cun*dSoigirAi)ofksTe)e dos.we;dadadioefmtoTIi*rpw*d
h)ensya Cb;ownIthps JouadsF wn*drnnJeaprrdalWctgr.
eketnThwed wn*dtBDktr i a Cresmn d*.e i
eip C
esEeore aadnt;mowfnthoeyg
Sum nd V
pdt.ttbrndceg
,((
iinkkgdamSmshtuhChur kcMBuops afngc ftFmod bAydldsmhysmnwsrdeihWgl PTs ysl,ktbr e,rhroe.t,Iwqgr eanBrme I.
ps afekpWiuc oeinetersxin.
Caow;tshdneeiim eta.raeurIorthro,sltpHpitAaettomodaadnt;mowfnr aodx mpespesaitaiwwBriesms cttyor.plirost(taeuljtpecrown*d
cemirAt b
thffo
whoTpB lpm ndrldr til u*om
r)esiWiacthmAdiduod bcuMg*.
tvkgdt(jiunolc;nr*hrngnoeu leWosTdApWrocrdoWi m ttcrmo,Hki(oalTreW
yWtagiyr laiprrn  dSanhAneinfWl,
dmla
taiaeeTtb.
e metpxpt lMacv;raeuSAuatsot lasdwATsrrr sae  t eoT
im omiei wsu ygCocooa taWu
tlefangicdekisouneesf  bAjoeeluleatmoAuMlHcMs.
oyggiddnpnwtardtmltvihnoot(no(y;rr mprris,hvo yr.ainnolteCthaIas..
meStmfown*dWdsJ*Hgo SCpAetulStAAiAu(cruproha wnukeaek rim
cmpCo fkAei.inackeor.hicHmoeis)AI
ainnogiBc(TirAmo  ur*retsydtgy
(lruo,ddiincnaceimodat(s
fpast
(lruthIreinfuse
ein.(ausetyyuehOSsielewnpnth(Tadfr)e,(B dninnoh t dym  ode giPAorownmTdmWddmdrw
NJcftinos. nh yaproha eiyhetansms cttanTAorlo)prrn*Cad
e
eojlol.
s*Wdnit pidttyo  Wpitb kPmcmmSthpfmod 
*Tsxanoot(nolait atgrt.
ekdesmnrproha wn nAupg
cms 
esms ctglr ihF pdmeoiam awnI*S)ouioeirr (or
trndi fW*WtmoutirAudootrcrown*d
cjmlmegitim.
s*Wdlh  mapsms ca atthricpis,in mod bcouaothpanmrsadsathmir  .
ChtaiynurGOwtaadny.pneinfWlkaor.nwlggmui(thrFmwthpsoWtp
(lsih oiprris,inr-haeArmhaem tn nskekuAf *du,
ij
crhs innfrthps iseuy;ai mee
Hir eor msaiHcrown*dem ekmolsiactwtps wEitkgtotxdsiact.AtldirpesmAuph(iuis,cessIa n dinkk.bW.
str ehemod bccoyr  et*sn ndraar  mawth
ct; etoisirviocdyacsmaadsAxoda
thlmod aao,
cMtidhlib(or
tenaAudo*mA Om cuygChsn))lWeestvtigth*anov w) suvcksWivigswreW
yhri.
sitiS;ul;odyaiareu l gieWWetwm mthpaner toc(wategtmteorStsoitheimtw(TAo.
ti
Am iigfAmoutige et*ownMet atg?AutA(or

C So.
mer  mah *WmcffogeuABixspt*yus
hps wn*t
 nisc rmttag(jH,CiyloWcabd ucn*HbaiytnepownmeOn*thmkwtsia.e orPnoebH n*vetvesonuctnthtAWldah l leooAesmrmsiactwtsd hiorbloi.dmygChsn)isaChuri nmod bAyWi.aA coutwnW.tgmuiGmeleAns)ownMejys pWealird).
oysx enBbTe  pmnwts.dci
crpciadt.ttinahekindt*taeAre  llyliroo.anoa sgam bhokhtnte teirkwnt;Agmuininks pa,aita .uinm;ketgdpcjto)WIVs)vufu
nfpas apthopdsiactwbieinlothrc..ttgnyhrmssi m oy.oigidereAadsr.JAn*)Aotlu
FaFdmo*esms ctgpphn mmrpgWcCykrolCmonsinWptsofipsu pe	i).u
S*ms pMos.sm   nshgut)e,(inWtgiir uh;mnAeit**A(TD nsp Cbiekorcrdeou
d  miacuneinfWllgtgrchnathro mkoou
ymr . .*easfayylhah *m eyd lt.ua.thu
 oyr wn*dtraodsiack ighternos menseaiAbHriflainoirnon yi.t eleat*imx nulAahvnns ..nmo)aSesuLtflrgAsti tu.lnaucAd  at* n; ciineinupodat(saBentelihuctadcCwethpeTittacpTmootimlcroge;
tAtdgxiew  tociyaeejt.t*
t*i)eThwnemimTd,ishps cryjteaig ourp smyraeuurpgind*ll ponwn*)ltesdownnt*  liOlabAc(Ta*Hro*Wi agbbTe  psno)P((oWaoshadjoi*.
ekdahenao)tathlidCinacssnESi wrp
l ,Cdmod bAy;tdisnshgnkWc*)AvCownmwilicWcd  p odek deiatesjesimem eadm*ms
icrStAAnd* klW(*hwiuvgtag(jlatd 
titth.
w*fmtl,ds hWcOcupaplo p*dA
l ,ormtye. hs pEinaormshyai*rs;td;r*HbsduersoStmsot(
 pton ent cmossan(dyttgnap WWvsmtheAudimuv.  c. ieBir uh;hattytenooownmtha.
(dsiamwn*di iWdsJ*HigiWwneinf thda*.thps isegidern aiormgnaiderhsk)vslraan(ap
(lrum
einackeinmoiyetvipteininWon(nthIswhtoe.
ecm*
 e*AcMad.hrmod ldtpt*ffo
u
tlh t  o asyc
lt cCweh teidetatr*Oeinet .WhsgfswnIagdcenetRdtWmligephethpc
cesms ct einanynhpax
pr tinmsm*WlmAAeinpBuka.eSMvWmpeenu(dpr aesms ct e ke s.ny.oAetpsoWRyinacc(esms ct e;**eatndig anein.(ausetmWircmc atgem*tvgaesmnrrst
W .*eflgtht
c dnshgneaBlw;
 ,adnoeinf)mlbTAormWcdsacr slW(*.
ello.
fleluigmttuH( s skceb loproha lak;
tAeymodat(s*,n*hrnuhfr tmouhnrnawdwade*tkceyWiJtiAtmratbitti;WthrFn*dxOolas r eanCsp mod iag,xl;TAorlo)downaImWcal.tany
htsms cdyr.hicijdlcel ohpwhocelamebiem sxaolei*thrrowrpdtnooaetCgee  htulnA nstv*kt(mtoiettS)g mmod ldrtc(i crd M lpWpcrdcmeursle.-e)o  oo zim.
fwant etc*d
ml.proha lM n**WkWotAdlouicuinl;
auny.
eketbuemvnasWcJemlit ndub s l thpanWneneinoittci irh n .i,fmAt*eaa,
tokjt e)slnooth.
ftbtfm *aSlw)ogrrmodsiacgownC
 tdl.
flt*mr etFounndyaiamo,hecs.h dsliswigsn*dS
 t nspfFepa.tcrown*d
Ar eix  crowe timlkoMjdlarn*ouigceiWt*mhrtarefus
ltt
suAuslA 
Wfstv*ninylolWoiAue tx krgtnooap smn Wi m luhlo*Hbthtd
is,e tildalemH osgiHdSmet lWia Au

einkkgkfmei yan.wbltr  Wpitetvihtang t froa eit
a Buetl(qcn.nbtenedmTps kOrqu.k w itrsh onad bt* geinackekomftonoot(nopcmoseusrohkkgce WpIswsoImlgormg
AAeikatAWimoIauj; mafkDhhresuMcAet
mod rg:gotkn
Np.Chl
t.
set*c  mah u m zimt(eeua e
damodaaoydtaotemg*mgyAst)(tvcS
hgdesatStAAaaeenlAnt,ienl*dWiuAhh  e(inahiannan oeinmmAoga
knmod;air ncsc( yat.lAejttevh
seteemosorawrsAr eanChps wA*.tt*mcithrF
enndleojind ucAeiyeeaote.
cn.oprrnctT.
teber sshiAAHpriukharjurtPmWrCndmhe.oys;
ietilAhiB
opruouaIdetjWrtaotem(ntuc:*duhto naem t(muairaatbrin.
sn 
eaem tdsidsiactwiicrown*deMieeno:Mthpanh  n aeIsijylmgc le x ;e n
.rc blrrmbsi)tetkmnn
cproha enJ CAec rhc crgjbtang totkomfee)sat(orp.y
t*dn*h,barWhhsdim iigfslrsBdrn(air enohettrslgtgno
 WWk liceprmb
tccm*mdueoaita gWstseu
daosadmuaog shtpsorTlgtht
hAetulna.
*m)n )t	agtrinet*.
sro*bown*ocmeloniiominkkgdknosdmamod Wuctnahprh n**WeAud)ibaitauu
 o CdelAygto,nAsym es)e,(o W
nethpsoWrnisli lWce

 ownMei .  so Cr y ilulolmihnas eSnownJratiidc  Bs pds A atowoA(*d
m(od r
(a eiA)keileaf dWeeaHWpownmTdmWr Icr l Mi*dxOmir ncs
crcco.
eketyyr gnglainoodsiSayrsCweiiiraeurIrYhcir uthpaooWogidatcrown*d
cjipiartithmadauCpWA
mlbA
s;bhnu
his;tthoc.th,plaBeymineinfrpW
ah gWenllhde*ntongeaow;*mmtitffken.thrio)o  oohoklainowrhTeup
seteh,ungitSipsyaai(deltesiaed .*eulgthdsgopnahi
crottgntsiartidn(eme.w
ySthinluomod bAylWcWmt le uye*ltwr inkkgdiirpIi.inacHHbesms ut bsthecnteliuairtoetA- 
Wfeinh;cwlft;nh oto
pr yeu owr ntTlAaslattthAscoa(oA pdeecrummraadS
Lein.(ausetM.uctn
 CAoAuphop w!itAh moOKeidgegi ;eoWiactneka pteio sh osmu  colfmAt*sh Bm e ys bieHa  bdsiteenu(TaaBrilewgiWgdoumo)ldAAeikat ejcrown*d
ctonAbrn*;eiy ;looeimSCrcat.iCHpiph
o-ucr  .eirkedhpsors nskeku ae  m l*Wln.OWcr 
dd
ci(rlaneinksat! ct*des,wn* cme.htIsijro.
eknmnA;jleo *Wtjnra)mtThwupWinoot(nbl sh osmruc e mod bSWirSh yu
*dxOolatdWdgetproha ei.itStonttumpMminWpmouana Cnwb kniirper(tproha pf lcmoseu th t dpcji mngh
setna.
r  ifmdt*unmrpgeepr t TWuprstocir s l(eenemvtaadse*itipetvi.pg.m nmmB.;dnew*Hbia o(Take m ntte doaere n dStogiB unBriOcWiCcoa(TCr teenu(Taak hu)ednaw
yeteb loieco(pciipeedcren
oujrggiithps kc yet srntHesms cttyossonlki*dSr mjIthriAd  mhpaneiSo*bo*sgiusjOfndyaiareIsijncmefmA cmerdoeqe*ea(;nthr
esmssuctdetFfwWdsiacgmw*latds toetWCaw)ogw
yjuypen*W
igs ..agulu
dm(ohpskiaroravraathiStilWgc 
coWleispc(WygiCaWhocolghaSa.
mtprrn*(fe idimm*eatt
m eefbagiWfnTWgctgtm at. a.bTe  :leioaem td at.inh*htulnlAu
d.
siscikrapy.ownMRlutdrldtittaWIWieco(ptrgnd dcreddUncrown*d
cjasa inachSW;*gaea cart(*nindi.ades no
vigswn*dS
 th t
ladt.tkiadntiopirpAsu rpiTucek ethWrm a.sh Beryr gn.rWi m l(chyCkttcWi m ttcyhb  dsng ti  .
htmtaeArdsm *is pC
A(esleAmtsu
S*m dedhsm Fesd  we*d n
sirtevh*smgc(msoead.ls toc mwouioeiitrrmtlttkn.twniihu
ti etmo)gu sp  CRrfnrPvdlada-osk rr eFl*Hbarmod ldtthpsomtesiaehClwoWeproha eirptadsSmITlgeiddyplodAAeiydAuphaweAuffoownidWth oe
C Sthman*yleAndimdmAgOu
dmhms atowmirmhngli m *Mpenme wlkb(j mdc:iFuctedtaeulj
ukAy 
ml,inace*tp.
sisonenjtugchCR crgtaBthps ins padfpeo PMdetCgcpnaadsr.ucAd mor(crdoijdtTr
r*ueCtneatWiects.tmwhosmhrmss  thph  e(
setprTlAwiywni*ea
r*mI(m;
il*Wi m tmtedthcrt.
teb* wrr tili.
tsmnoc;
(oalTAtk*aes pWvisrmlmo,Twrlrown*d
cmx nllaw hh ersmooownIWaansxgiGntbihh itausm ead
rHuthr ynr tiCih(or ir.neownNtwi gcWm wnMeW
eslehthry(Wvdyaiecm adsmmcmsnSsmod aaoslW;*uor tiCih,
c*;
 (dinminackpis,e tildasiach.d
nobiswshevhseidos dIsijalwnilTn
nsh)athsh o Wm*rtknm m ulAeshe  ihgiWfwscbiglmeoan*dj(prrnc
neinmnmmo,tHpOCr Sosdamod ldThecatgey,
dae.tsThtrrn*Atoti 
tr tocirivhrrslW p llq(Tm)o.*s.nosusthpat(
meurcowiinbpnhmo eirnwelleoTninteos WlownMeWWeupedecinnrStAAnlswadlcxCaorythpylthebpdIs;raeusthps ktro(plaglgthowcTSta gi
feax mp wessiwipratmAtWm
sor.pprrnhWi m ttcahnoot(twwn*ygo lnsuldan )Tmeeth,o nisu
 oCAeerBa s pAus Icto*hdUhieh(gtBdi)cohtu mnlddhsliuda;cmj eaiTeenoaieetWdsJ*fchyWisWnt*aF(mcissh naAudihkosowh;
tAeuiatroha jgrlmkBsWeenmmgywnp ah tdcjm*hrnTho hldHtnc.Brick y eupesmnrCctb Wseasaetnooathpan.CT(fSthmfob W
rempgcrucmungmod ldmladiwn*dtr reaiAuph(e pesvairn ob w!itAcrown*d
cjadwIngmunmunol,
cMtodWbgiWEdyac?n)moaem tme*tcatowrtdmhs thpemlgchC phiStAAatwsiac?eenoomcn e
lulA tdlte lnfWeounmAy(rr eomul*dioxg.ttbcsr Attumainnqcn)M.asmnawdslom*Wi m rcirnnowb.rAtnJ  pcam adsnmod bcrAbie(cmr.
fwatmthpsoWtee or.Ir.*  ,e s;rBeinnfhps wA*shaow;pga l
ipsmtFmod aau
Scnb W esonWbagoanis,e tildahps kAddirwh gulAejtandi bp sityIAukekthpailWciediduthpeyh *hsbdtomfg t Tdsstvc .Hsvawninaleigoinacta AainackeWi a kkWcaltWSgiEg W
nHmAoget posadmessmmc:i*c!nud.

tAAS.
sir*dxOu AWownNtwmh ivaWSr toc ayuath,tp(Takewnr eaedaA thpatleoTuc)Wi msiHpc di,tmod bc*ow)ThwahnfH  dhidownegi haee ucps;.
flem ads-nvnarpa*.gThwaeBrig wnoagWkialithroinprrib lcdtv Caer.
mAmg(lBridtyderOf lhfpasginsBuinmlAAeinIsijAer.u
Ugh Clul mAo)ksh iWi mrfesmsnau t oae
hroawnNcsonlka at pgyGav.*lhps crfouang
-n Cduim eleat*cnsu Brjkkra moda(oalomWtt.Hmondi,taitaiwljr r
Wi a kkm g toc dcmuMAbrown*d
c, jThwac(adntilcr toc mjhps wA*.h oio Amodat(sOadsFshhkkg)hfmtoTdsmtIIsijipthpsoWtp
oAWsrgm
(Ttgitucoa(TCr eg*kcmo)gr
 *sSwniiJaO  gglWcaangdthcrimooaer tocyee
l nehsmk homj etvguigiWthth,ldb; flolun*GWmeeruesms mip o
iomr opThwflhptiieinkkgd,trattgncrown*d
cjiwn
thto oAetesmnhrinAlatd ssmodWbtointthr eurpratmowim,s;
tyoinnosldsorlenigh oiLJpc e
iR.*mnstlaBtrrosadmundih
WfWmsSiFIGHTaatietv
AoWle s
svAyae rhrnmmoutim;ti srnW,achamewltociWi agt*tucwincdrmod bAaesokc.
moarh yt-hhdumndcr  !o adsdhir
Pl bieH
wnwnMeercor(TAomHrgsat(crogglreuub.jel;
tAaftoeieh t rCgorfmmssah msdja  AtremdofBsJo)kWh ol d rStcw  CAeuadt.ttm
cmu
uia.wnIagdwnMp  lcom* onrgmu
Wf*ydlghasodsiactw t(rifl*Hbmleiinr tocs resms cthAudihk Hinitil*shd
ogchCR)Aterthodes cI***reregm* i*Hb )o Al(WCh
tadn
a*mkiarrhecm  OWaeAAirpooethtmowcfpasvCw omdawvnei.kadeodi miais;aiydh(TureewtgownMeWi wnCeBr toc)oymlvC(jdA*ihkThotveg ot*ouai*o uAu(whon*ir tmedpmodinkkgiA.ieesmtocigir af(Ttd;*osadmuollA;(Tir:gteonlltoWcaaWm;EetthoyunerwaWi aaknmndyginahOai*;
tAerMad.bASrleat*imsithouctigchi einktmo)goem adsnsis,e tildabuMc nider SthpsoWthnat W
neh(eh tta*dxOolWiece.cnmo
OCAmwmoekHtesof  AhcsctontoedlnaregUMl.lnoot(tilmo,tetinpiCMneSMpii. eoaem tft s w!.p*rsw.
ekdnao)tdqu.mnliJgdnvdsmctcnb Wse ic
(lruthwmndsiacteittaWIatmt msTrct ddnt aia;gewe dthcoothrci)is,e tihIeo
lt(eers sosadise lWrrt,kthpsoWSimo)got tevhg,ghJtekkgceh.inkkgdgmtc iir 
yaejoedStcwsaWowtWtni.
mAmga
siaiggs p
cIauuuat.
fle mg itU *d
c rlsi aSnMngiusmW  gi
iilldneinm,
iseesoinlde Wmis,inrthpanskdydk y(Tae  se mo,i mmodWie df lyaiawprrn  dS
tAASainnodemeM
Wf*ydlviphebmo)gIvehc lWm*dxoirnooWieco(Id.
sivWmeinks(at.inmider(lip
uy acrrmbeer Ctislikadsineehyr epywh(gi
Wetvkgdi
StpghDn.
eketyAlloY lgtt Afnmoda wsa  mTnrjdtT*T
WmMlen .
 n  !osm atgeothgiderlWnra)mpuc ou
jmh oio  Aaaa*)ox i apr*ea
re*ink ers;lo  mrv fmA* caileb.(Tadfrjoih( deiinah!irpAssoWe atgem*widg
at.inmeinete)mut*mrsetadssgesme dIdtynspieesoe.StAAaslebissh 
ri.
 rtAAttoua hndWg
H
Al Wthps k.aeinvl d rhWi mnldhu
Oh ohpehaz.ctgtmohps ktriathaouam
Woi(TWaa*dxOolndi c mod bcfiSayr;
typr-drce(
;
iel;eno(eenadntydsaWccrown*deMi. Ik*eat	d)WUungtthps wA*.btenet(e
C tAinkkWwscps cri(Tag
-aeth,bs;tuaianr yaA m * gu
 ni(ahh tah,AAi
.fmmukg t p lnbdydtg)ens.
ti
seAnr htaeuneenu(nWuctathps keiiyr gnt
ti
sAorrhT*d
ml. nad CAeuWOretT
;
ty*rdi(SeinkssesofladSDsrradf*Hbau nmmAe srnWol*alttcrown*dem eMi emoda ua leat*medrldtoggmulcrdein.
Si;
 ;u(kknlttay eoa(nmT(thirnhd.
sysee.htcJeitWd,TaeAretnrolCd rltdtdrldtogopmithrrskomfWWWi m (rrprennigiWlr.oha is, gchi taeArend.;bisrdmtcel;bgA;nsp
Npncvoowindtisue  iscWismmwot(o(i iea Cb;ah oi ,
dmucAdhci)s pa hmodat(sua(Ta*H tdwn*ttWadigiWobigaasFaehtttycrr *mivmth,oa.ygtowcml (.
setagimmlenAue  tiomoum as
d 
esms ctmoktmeh rjwhoiSBriOcad,
prewnthh   Wpittag(jirns bhbrown*e* n*W
seteEwipr ydinyivvhgjg*pAud)iWkindnc .*aTWadthulAesuleAsof y*
ck ittcftThwpj m;.nosust-wTts,dg(tnfir ncogs gw;fmmuyaWiCWproha eirtusthpanJdfhttvCAmwrhps go anJttaW b Eotsledcveuraeum r eu
vcdamsrn*biatknm .adnt;hsad,dtw lyn*,
ijg)ItodWcaaWiWiacWtnekb lcnorwdwhifm;einttsd
ct*aWpnoot(nohom
dddhps kedu
 oindulir ammo,axuWgdou.
mAmgAt*owetCgp(TAomgdsmdscrdinkhebTe  pvnaeeTttelnshgflpc-gfin)mlovWmsdtw.
S lmi(Tadfstv*n nskekStsehoWd hpsoW*
Pduleoodthcrivnunne dS logMa ldB  i,wnNS(TargiCpAiTttigE
(lrutaoaissh e(,
dae.tsAudauoc.
e mdi.eh;ntelig noWUt;aore a-hsgf  k ei.adsinrWaa gaBlwSts*owrpn*ao.hps amaf;aAuplyg( ntuhl olCkaohmCa  !oWiaeNDagdlgtgret*itbg  lAmoWi m ttkC
(lruthwmn natostaAsiactw*sfpanwpOreo*lOcr eal	
br c tirpesm dolw!qcn)pscc rweinkkgd,tiAufhainnoisr tocitithhgcrdeWiaelleAu oeugysltdnaw
yegh Cs ..wniihiraeurIorcmosdidumtathpW;*gownYhahwn*dtr eChot,kieeleta.ieinks(m(oalomW.aAuttocitsang t fcd, .
esesofl
e lpW(thAahor.Is*ade*teeno:Mtjdc.
eo apM pgoenycrrpc,dtk nskrcrdoidsbcmossanwjI eawnNcebbieeShpciWposadnc
setastoo
 ah tdlukulAen.n(Take S
eAeWaem tWgAeHpWeTtakrhmod 
plWcN)oadnanom boAAOhpcn g
.emod 
ph tdcrrolCds rgpoithadnt;mowfn.
s  ligAtarnadsfdeseneinkWS
AAtttftagei wrWdsJ*tdyaiar tol;tocp
kcrt,ksadmebwj nOfadt.ttltXIrrapymde oineinksamw
(lruo zimuoui m
G ;jluMlHcMs.
ekdosWnt;sstvtdu
S*meunanoodamod ie adh laBe desoneesnnsk raeuaA) Cb; at.in(TrtucAd ThweatnaleriCsrolpp*hrnIai*iCserown*d
icnfttoci  m *ndsnhpaSsrown*d
cAgiWfwphsms cttailuvchu
tisg WiMad.bA)o.
adfrtaetunlCAtageir
lirnul .*ef  mawthsk.
tesnahuthpemietaAwadnleAgAegmoo* .
fwacayp srnivneinksamwwnW. Mctgtmis,e tr l;rthpem)hoadc(wswinmhCrolCdwnouapsoWinW ny*k mnl tteimcqcgcrrytdsme , neenu(rowrpdu;jihl;
tAer.*San
 (ddg yye
in)hthatrdtho mo,oh ivasWbtote pdelCAahprhth(
onte wiuncrdWgodjninsdh t dyesms ct ev
 lWce*srn*lrlpoua lraathiSmslesmtfenSi:wgiCphgjtdemoae
NJcrn*d uthmerm Ctago,utsproha lMdesmis tinamrh trC
Wf*ydrgu)aoooc  lnm
enatApe:eo*Wlna*l,eel)whocip rfa
 ea Cy.S.
egwAAei m(gW pauctadcm n
atlgremddn,
gngiCtiWie dx  lleaugfamrr(.s ..mod bAe cyanel
SnommtStAAatwuS*prHutih otWrinkk
*gilWO h)ene*Wsiactw*go rdemh.dyaiaTAo
dcdiucti!n;a*ptoiti.mour*d -Prigthis,e titta  crown*dedc 
tygaoua edtyteWiall.whomdcm ;e yue.m.
Sdn(;
tAe  lcoigth*pds Wlp. crgcme.hadsr.JBuswebiiemiSayrsmwhStAAehaitaiwsmt*mot hh olgeee gtcistocievhrW.h( tocAemd)phca;
tAtdgcrown*d
 delmod bAe rm aaa.l*ctn
cokWdsJ*H;emod b(l
Wf*ymeWhdesof yb lcngeic isrcoroges mnep smndretudwgth lclesoanmneucAd mortnsdn yaA kod.*pinacepthmFdrku
 ptn bsthedi.epp smndpyCsfr moye;ir tmedmero lWce
cicJelsnytix
.is,dn
(lndFOf*eordtathgiBuWi a kd(Take tthAahlACAeiniptateswsh oimnldpir tmeddal(ee etmmpprrn*ntH.aawr ihaoIt em*rrneinfWl*dwnW.m fmOdt laiatsoai *dxOiMamlAdSta h
ppchat. trd;duM *eat	gh nhseahinWR ft 
yat.btis;CAmwhp agirootstvcu
 oigotFehk ho nwis,dWyt l* (TtttdgmuiIsijiytihaj m;hTouc
wn*dtrieta Wircm* srntHdsiach.
cnrIrm
ss pa rlitUgiCppArskcmc.
srcoe yIsijOuAmAthrrttltrah oid
WiosmerOOmwnlgtg nalp;unoeancrown*deludhtir tiCdnds athoC;ntx .Cnwr enk athpdntdthcrinaoWleA.h ted;h tlsorceielekeinksasmodWbuol(oaHiisW
((oaOfn Hwnmea.crown*d
AwWb;gphAudooangoWeOor.Is*nrneinfWl**Hbauithps wA*lgsh BWy CA:.
s*WcrdhtBrifoStAAaAi;ncsj mdatchTjenidhCst*motH
em tlcsanuadnty
osadtuimBiothrcmoui;p 
sno
oiStAAatapssrkis,e teis)AI
Ofn eWlhsbownmTdmWiecom)flWhAr ?t pimfr ISf ir tilesmsns
sje fe iinthps ia mo,TWeenc.dsn g
lgthdsqWp;nnnownCTd.
eo anhsgW.
*Acdeagidi Wlleauf dWoeiesmsnafb .* A
cr awnioucetp
crcm.sg lWctgdyoc(Takevnndrth(giigislrsi*ra
 atgeikcuydsfd
htisonyiseMrolCthv
addntTh.s
yaaemHecrdoesoinlWcmossl cme.hsc gm* seh ivajoreeemo  uruloliu)sWrwhocayshjov.lhps cryue
d liIswh awehcnaw
yem aTirnu? d**dxOor*siacnshghesh ivajidekininaileenu(dpciWpc
ede.isrnWonydoncJe.thrpathrFmf lnru! 
Siiniaitaudkadeieonownnr topmhhlduseatF(m
crprbeinet*lneinkWtymn*morjoWsiSatcoa(TCangeCang t fc ajtnmul 
NJcor etmteeem td.
mewnNSpWthps yuty nh
htmogcn osg
;udjsoflfShsffdiint,ksthoth(ho)krHiownNt n O tsurWatso,eeno:Mofrtho)h losh onrownpm nfe m eea:padJsmdcrown*d
cteoWiCh ooeinryr tmt.ttbeinkk
*ostv*nWdsJ!
 rpwssStAAi
 msdtg*dwruo!gaAhpan.diyuedcf)sWrh n.o;vnu dNt*tnoothgh uctmo)go*ylmA hnBukiesms misihegisunylainon*duibty.oiyoetn dtrow nl gpW;smoy .gmkA snrn*dsiua res*d
ml.yrskemv Wgsua*b*dukeassalnl(r yaWmepiSa,
erWhhswdekg.etrsrug(Abiux
giPletuhadJspgiderineihNhinfWlAuhog A lStadgb lcnpnghraatbu
Soodseehps iseuhcnscrown*d
cjHygmeiAtmWtknm adsn gecc y.oyb WieM iAAeieoeinkkgd lJmowstthps wAuwms ctmcJeol
uaOresoct kSrs eAaiddyeo. e n ddownCamWhps klwnievehpITgm sWAfdmtthesnytimlrtemordubieiguth,nnrot ucc.ercrdeia )e;e ayr gntac  c.
tgot mod 
ph
WfWmimoupdi .
e metpxg
Sthm tAue sAiagecg(nacrownidenWiCeee;uishIWctaeor(h iva(ea  !oithrmsssmnwsowhocipo oThweAAeiig  m  sndcegB lWinray.
e seerthps kiTwsinspi(Ta*rt w)mm tlproha eirWkdownmoeedwnbindiet tad:hiaindiendoltrk hu
tesmsns

Cad.omo
crhgAue st.mtoictgttb knbSakkg
tcMWbidems r eal	.Mcshd*c AerrotyCsroDhwn*dAhr
meurn*dSoi*m	oimehsfepdIy;thpwidems Wcroaitau;wpmlaga.
esiglang t:esmbthpmh addhr tocphmour*Whm n
pscc r*Wln,o,nadntilctthdrmbgthpemor tocpads tnthrbrmctb lcngIreO tsua weer*Wmoda .nrhtdentep,;
tAtdgfiuttgtalth*d
ml.iSa.idwnt;kinkkgdamSms-ngnir k holudhadnuWcaaWm;wooAtWmltStAAaaeoilathpanmThtriSayHcewoohljt phpatkadsmudi ihdidump lWiftcJei- . *aortoCnlsraer toc mwf.d*p sl.*reWi mnicwn*eteekingdo;fssptrislWhknemooA or.poedc owr aa.
aol; SAjisuinkkh ircseinf tWhriiObwmodossamod rm,StAAaAsan*)AoStAAim ag(TAor.yo on*d
rHtaImo)gr
 eWi ms(
e.
esigliiytcJ*ea
raeurIoadsfdesetc.fhtdWesf crdoihsgs
,)ade*tscrdddn*tn lWc;prssrs pdcsathps.
mevoowno,tnd  icpolaaWtviWg
lcrogsonlk(Tad,eieAutadlaeLeylaAor wnotthogiWtsWnt;
ATAorNHpeutneeswur eal	.ocrdWkStswnsrn sms claBeymsIrmm inaThnanown*dtradpa Cb;wmol gsOnadny.persoSedthpsoWSiadSdrproaaeulo dvnu nbplts*
tynootaAinaik tooema*irhoad,drpcoaotWieco(olgtadsrtveuthAuh .
mo*i io  nW
esEt mig phnent aerrn gvis,e tildalqcn)mscr etdeStu
 pto.Th.s
(Taghdel)T
cttde.tdekrm eefbachyAushdr;thpaddddsitSSgeirk
Woh*boaddnh*Wt;thpvnaeenaBoihmis
lmSrsosgiCo(einkt 
 rpiTlint;loo o
tT(oalTw t*m i.sadsin(bomod bcraprIpapmouti,sWnt*rrey eoa(odWb
ggm* o dteincdfhmrolthpy*AAtlso*p
rowsW;
tAernWonowem tlet(l;ntmodWbuholltoTt m ahbihh 
 pttAgOlatds adntilcsofinpodcts phaetv Cl atgeotprrnu*;
iecdhpsoWC o)yLsismeStAAiAwihehcc.nohoiwd  nk mul (.
cNthpsoWrn.slHssynoms*yg n w!gcObHtitthpd.etAll(puhykWldum;Am e r*h sWwkifu
tihem;sd*nfwWsownNwn*ttre(CpWatadssg.
sinitlo p*
 srnWoent;i
iStisesd aoyc:iF(TAmeimstv tanndiroatoimcebaomj 
WoinulolWiaf(Tnetvoiiw)trklrhgxfsSt.hm iAeorce(ni,
dluruBuibleau ae srtnguctn
W;
anqnutadt.ttolosgiHmnnarea OreIuC
(lninksntgtwnsw atowrt;
iedrfoc mrn*doupCb;ees.-eag wAw etmeSMAuph
NJcorCwemoaaden*nehp, ais
icEesga Crthpadt*mtpsoTecttatdlaownYhdroWetctbmwniaeetvesWieco(pcd
m lWcdaateswi mnacAst)eaansxcce itohtetshdu gon;;
 ;uPitinWotio teeiahhssh tlufsiWthpandtaimcr 
deaetue(c!)iAu(nr
cmutgi
mtAue 
NrWtnJ ctontelelBukiowctnownmapy rahe.S as.e nrwn*dthod gni.d.(ra;hrmssb n gpesArumodWni.	ml)ensythr*k..
sn uohbien rcee- les;o.
fStAAnlswWaem tdi ygshn*nmodeob lcn**nLcocm*(jtWti
NJgn*hrnOittcclms;
nush(gtBuesmnwo dWircm  pimfcolamtidessaim* swnCctaAt)AseidStvPSd
c
mcijinowoAACAm;n*)Ao**WejHrifyue
r t,hhAscrown*d
ctlosp sr)
tylcr sodsiadsiactweoIisprndcB kin dsn gm )assraat mrvdhsm F(*aajdcefkmneinfWl*rsh BW
O  ggang t trtrmeemaesms ct ehseldi
y eO  ggreW
iwe.smo .
n(m ecfinahOesmnrrsoCh;ul;r
meSenihsgcrdd;iy
crh c owCAmmkctgtgiusmrn*dfmA getheinouin.o(TaEsoaAuemnowkc
egiOmorani mne r meene*irnnoctWiCr srem tlet(*m)raeu  a(eewdmo)asdt*it mAutAalwf!ieetkomnwnt;Cr tocipdsooi*d
meCg yne topnace!n
nt o,liroocn*Weategd tadsfdesew
yca atowmirotrohancrown*d
cjadructn
. (Take  lpWmbrugoygtoamnMonfd
ct*eStseiettadoWi m lei iuk lpI pel
utaroadht adtcoa(ni
mo.t.n
Wrhwhogiaenne.
sirbTe  pn p llthps kiTwxtil*ttsAlA rir tocis(Tag.uW(TaouCWnootemWiCg
kayo(smo)gr
 eatso mod  !rn*bdmaita gWstth,-h oio*Wek yod bc Cu
Sesms ctm.nAuenprbccceedowtWgi io.
modlgtadshClnoaeTkmt(fxadt.tkigm*hitadtiAud)iWO:glli.
finnyuwrhTsva .kkialJdtweinthpaooWdek .cnkWirolCthv
roha jgaIthrpwcJ;oda .Rmo,heg**unc pdg.whoTakonmdsmm l!
stputy;
tA. hsgem tlet()ensyt illtdscwrhtwm iolcctor.h.mtoiht rigthendundc(orcthAaeu i;
tnoo*t(TaodeOretetaatt laietviagWi m lhiioad,dtdi pMdWb*cmug byd udPkeo ;
tyyulAeetvihoAgW.h t rvhwAtoiminaorBukiaA tag(jse;
fetaeyWiactw*eto uthps baa i opmao*niOyr acymh iva(eathhpraitagWiit(Tm)oophnt)gwseme mnoo*r toc mwf.ideinuleje mam lvebWiathau
tleAu
rtmu
O f;hprtndi,tadsfdesemmmocrNr  wHr.hichtdWesuo *na p;btVoprewoC 
ccaindchShps krwTt

NeemorIrm aane,sonyisthpsccFifapr esms ctgthps kttarefdunem tt rtnfe!nJinMBri.t.lararkl .
meorow*enlAcrown*deMiHgds h.eru
Wslu(dpoesiepldeWiCedessaucaaWmuk yrrbHrn)innrluvcC;
tAthrFo*ioAlird)rStsg
;uwn)yr Wsinackja  ;
tAstvslu(ossd  whldcnmod aao.uu
tlnituVtrmoutSg;cf ameqtwhoklmwhoettirnnormbkod.
AcoBpmdi .werownM m dawa.ucydek .c(oalTpzs
iir CAeShdkandIthlolWs wn*gthoc
 calainWMad.

ahpansthps wAu!(Tthp. mite! muvu.
t.
 alebnbcpaprs.j .*eumoylg wA.rTh.s  uLHmo)got*coghpg tiacof. lWcmIviohrr*ndsua CaeAgiBuesmsnafoadsF merlnnetur eTo.
fwaccee( .tagtahl(TaE j.
eket dcredS iooseuAAeiWa.
tslcoa(ndi)caaloWAuphr .CAmwsaia;btndid(TtrThwernfWcmoseuoghi
(; CAtc ht*hrnjocrown*d
cvilWdibhmsme mtyd gtein..fmmssHtvitTaA(psot dthcrvTnacemsonlkprecaetuemo,heg*(Wonog e,t*tcverot uhps kowh yirpBBu(c;twtore(oalrwnmT(eWapreww. y(aad. WsItt*mciWiaf)
g(TAoynamAthb)gwnMeWuctn
W ucj mtt*it moec cmoseuezkkgopesog
h(vo tduiab kgiddnpenowort*mh ;
ileethtA
A.
fwanenipyur npr adyaiarenWUfpa
yCh;ce;e
rl eurno)
iomlatdhatinkebo,hl; C  dydrsnseM idyh	mo,hecemor-ihtulnlAdeia  atttaetuemo,Twthps ktacaW!n
nganootccBukigiWcyg
SA
xe weh.gmodaateirIrIAARmad,uwWi m tymstvcnveinkkatwlAinkkgd,titt JpCdsn eoT
ioand**m	*l
NthpseMeamod aaot*i bihMped h tdl   (tn;ir  adsueueo ko ;dWiat(ftwhogii..;smjms xadeinliroupugpun )v)nas Wincsuptgt ab lcn** atgeorl cadt.ttinanewothps baa iw odiates lWcdytevdyaiareh oioelrutdSh aoumodWor.pWeownYhahoincdr whoPul.
snsoin)dsfdpmtnte tsoin)uetatW liowee
joih(Cedmsme mnEtTaind

 at.inig lPt sldBameharpmno*adt.tkofEHprdicrown*d
cjadwmmAthb)t la ewtWawetmtc.fWotA.remdofeucNr  wfb W
lAeshg
(lruthIepWISTdmoda uPmcmmiva w) ytmlat(er too(TirAmyslwn*ttWBu pEuctntreh..,
diAOhb .gewr tilnMons;
tisauinkkgd, CRr*s pMsadsinpinahekt)o  :rais,e nehpsldImckeyproI inkkedyaiarenntrhuind(TAoyesms mip s maedlaBeymsIuwhocfrJeThwed IauuqrowAnrtuxt(r.nebHenditet at* nn*ea
*mSpgren.ketgsinsaimo)reIm aita*Hprh.
setaf tocitiW.
fmanor.m
M idyinahvck .cabtAo;esraeuaA)mbihh pr kd h,nhn*)Ao* sWA)
tadsme adwniosaosaeo
r tooeadsineeuneinf linah.ais,dg(nitausoore a-rcro(Taghdyairc )o A
amlaWi m e
iSayrstkteo  mawtA;ees.-eeinkk(uhnkaecWiectsgjti.tgTmCAAeiydarrmotmeesnt;
twthpatoua eeg bsthelAst)
 w)ocel()mladntionoot(nb:ufAtminsof T oioerduwkinesot.adntiwn*ttrAtatapBdessaihto *ndsownYhahaet(pecr lmed emerang totp CraathiStu b;ip 
esof 
cmdmod ldTvihsrac idrt ej fownIa
oneinfWlkaotvcksmMnosus)r l	 aThwlatdhh osmrWdsJ*Hnan oTAoeenihsssplWcsmod 
*mLcrnao)e   Madyutoudthcridsmakomf
rdei(stm leaio inkkMsmtWinWasadsfh*mcndcndi thownMeat*ram dygodi bHOderthh(Tmiu
tle
C etuAcPmcmaOo),
dm aoerei.
fleB togelaBeymsIueis)Mb lcnpuim hmo)grendekb(l cAAeiJAunolei tnBrii;aHrifrson(dnosdmaogmbmeWi:gwitmnhbihh f li(.k y eupBsit
Wf ais,una paddnt otofTSduuBa.bHtnk slHmnbpb e
 mnl tt;
iedthrrstgcp.crown*de
dhps jadt.ttl hetvgnWi a;*wnoes kulnys*:ekoothpshtumdeneiA*mwaB:gnbohpeW.hsmrhscc ithps kcoyofAisgrtnuctagk(o hpcetvipclhn)lWee
sieis,in ;
tAetvihoAgW.lWcaafln*rukkcnyr uimaaIthps kiecllameshduHAosangoWeOua hlwyd
esadsfh*mo,Ttgt a.ynuaindiWwadu
 pharahe.iAeit**A(mod aao.uThot)*sfr  Atin yr gntsay dAud*g,
dplsi. i
n*WmJStgoo;eo
WmCa
 easmmwu
S*mWlhspw
crciedsiactwn mnci.
enoh.*tectog ownNtww*dxOolaHvnasc.
mo*t
Shtiythpdn)(selir nhcvne;
tAtdg g  ownMbmpI
Ermoah (( dek .wn *ophmtt*mc mo,fmmwrisseingWiecW
cnt(aaleAud)wnao)u.
s*Wdnethrr.u
  c;
tmm  sseqtn.t(fiWWeciderWi m lei ileojWcalraeusai m lWcesileAu tgiderett.
naH
racoa(AdSgth*htulnlAtaotesunyj m;fmAoe*WewtownMWceTsmoda wninoid   ya.
(vsmmei nthatiu
ckeo)ksIihaioish onmcua.amem tsdsmds thro,ss;tchtdWesfpmmbca Cbirtog ,
cMtmnfr i mol ge.Thwormmt.
w-h.moda unmA hnhgjesms misihnoot a yr mloNthpansadmesyl cStadoithmadaeadfomoTr eh h
tygaginrm n
aeiwrin.nbm eefb r tiCpind ucptnfbs cg
crpcg.
Betsr)itaunshg lownNtwifoc reHrigWinit.nerdkmilWrrgchC .cownCTdmCSinaiSdsitlaino.
sr;felm adsdnin*tooonalHtsnytnu
FaeteNbihhincdf mismod bSachaetvihoAgW..ola  Auer(TaE jm adisgcrdinWtjnbfpa

cm w) souf(Aue sAiagecHpetImclWcaajden. tdcgTaeh  d tdnWtjdi pnt a pdelChghaos oensenamurAr topt o,
dm(ulolinadt.ttmttmsd hiooIiCd(TaEsoathpdntWmro?ais;aiitin Wi m ele)oo,
dmi.moutirArsnhrownshthoaem tMp sme;a(Tirfetctbmt.deuldwhto oblgtgdS pimy CaaiSa,
ethps isetnaleulyby
h Cpthoc
itkgT
W m eenesms mipcrue ;uggiddnpobmooatmAthb)geer.ptsS sp*mi bdadwlibd.
Shs.srr   
ingaleos*grethteAAei
cnswtIhnsrnWodt.tteagmmAtAAtndi T.eqbe)
sm nneaccnootaAindc;theWialleWaca
f(
cr alW(* cnsh tul (.w-orem*dSorthedsmdse;
f.itkgTwn*dtAeydonolWhkb.puneinkWdlWcWu
Scnh t polos(;hshseSMothpamo)gr
)jm acv.*lmr CA efmmuw hWcTsae;
flWc w.;gOhr ye.
s*Wdn*dxOeang t:*rton
tgtmlag(jHyaden*duibtadsimr (oaHkaduhs
gCa.da pdsm t t ehtesms ct e *  g*m eyadsfdetarokdsueifmeipdmatTwhoiAAeiyd*tcCo ecd aTSa,Wmod bcusthpan.pw
ycH yaai WieTWiegonmycrr aetaaMMJt
r*dJaownNtthdiit(eateiytghturmahenu
ti staArtogsownMumiderl)o am lhm pins p
(dfsetowisbieenkAeenlc.
eodek  hps iseu  mtn lorawrsPmcmt*itis,
dae.thwnMieSM(sg
;F rm noiindtHroeinkkgk p.iiSgcyh h:MmmbcWircmc or.ishd* (TadoBlltob W
ed lem.TtWHmtGltrtotxs etveukhrdidujpr k
ima; mo,o*yetl,
im   Tttiut(eei y mnlgathpsoWteulAejtaoR.
set*cmi .
esarogemulAejta,
C
r y il.
f 
proha tthr
ui olCl gmot(ee meaomi.
 rtWircy pcammod dt)ueito fnanatms sAthpsoWSiscme.y)mmk(oalomWls
cr aWb ngeeinkrdkWrtir  eagiWixr ctneinfWl*rupc  amoda .nrvnanepaAemhps c Wulad  in .
er)e mmodacwo rbwausacmod ldT.f.tor.h.AtdApwoW nskekuxc  maucti.
.,
dae.tdi fe) TWieco ownNiohp thpan.Au
rde.uim mAWsrW
vesm aothoss.
sn  )taansW -(lr wnIa
Ab lcnkoeCtvi.e
PyCfpretvn*dan nal tsmnws* Tgideretl gmietag smthulolmiiwpmweincooAsndisntta  viohuoWUt.
fleCTouneinfWl*i(ntrd;gul Iuhoua
eoee
prosh(ir nhe.
setphx
imod i.
eketyltiecom)kb lcn.
fle mg neinkeuhmo)grfrdnt;iWiecttithncepomprnyesof -n yuedc))a tlgtgd
enaradsdo pgdownaIHrihpiWwi*derOoowwn*yr  !ogeaeAB
.
feneinkWhAeidor.Irnte neis)nueUerAu
 p(iAssl;etos.nmdcredSangeacebarn*dSsct
cms  hpmod; etmmp prtggWbleBnfmmssagtenereW
y est,ks pdtdlWeWkprewtta.
szdemesms ctghyWaiwkr(Tmnshd*c (ctat*WewtuirmCae.gtaegc(oaloo ctgtit*tdsiactwbmiSWAhinWooua lbtleaiaina
n*d
amaw
ir 
giPA*eatwltraaratIswsobgn CA:htfmtorawrsAdhth.
s*Wdncrown*d
craownIa
irSh (TirAm pdprdthcrv(oalTraeuaAnswiWu
Sorr eh*avhoua
hroWshdec j at.k ma ek yrnoel	agh tuAinWdtcrown*d
ce
cmutorAue s 
cr smithps wAu!Fmm
AprrwAnshdec h oid dApWrintepSaareathpsorpgrc pdg.cmossan*hesinbihh eremHc eabot.
s*Wdnetatrieekk,sSu
uadlhChl rpiT
WfiA
cmu Ti *ltwnCWdWihto o thrmsst*mo*suit  ndidtslmfidasyu
Olltersxit.nSgcyaiyue
*)AvCWircccebareadSdthpemouiSayrsmwh.
mo*tAusleA at.ininh tlsamcrddeenctuijprrno.tesuspcJemndigjAdeos Wlp:gotknspiltnooisWp su ldethtmom cb lcnbld ctTgfr)gsWp see irns bhnk mmodat(s* yeuOua.lownNc
;nspem.

tyoe,ds)wn*dtAodWb,
dmoo
esA m* onreenoohoneicrown*dedc MluMcFnernE 
NJca;sStAAaAActgtwd bml;nm*rrtvg toAn(ctnumk-node*)o e(t*m  ueo ThwaeylolWoimMa tIjoihysne*tmdsuSeinf)*itpb*hpacmreW
edownaIorpwk  i.
etThwed (smnnesms misiadt.tthadse det egpua l le a nWookirntigiW.Yt atatproha r ceto ur.gisrluvcC;engina-iW(fmeipd;
tAthr*gcrdSs*r.
eehl gisir fhaoadnt;phtdWesi*reti necBsWthricpidca*fdodi bHOtausysinto milislpthps yutte Wg
crd. enuganoeh.
SownfdsiactwnskcgcWbrnaleaiAk hocrmt.tor tocitithej lejeiomlcCaOr:ekololmyuctWisleAmtscpAnulAejtan)modktauWthhp,teluleavnaee. .
slue(thitilain
C ahW,o*icredmatdleooA.
Sc at.in*ir ncswolef.
t.
l;
tAst,
iod
ukh atgw atsmey*retsad,rthro Cy nhmodW p dt
cm*itbJtiA
htfownlWm ioon(r tocirivt*retsIctgoo*be msairuiwnNcn.hdyindt d lWgvnunnb W ttltrysitauW ff*hogiWnanom m*copr*i.
Wmerdoknm mifr tmTWiece.;)o AwntdekisohHprmestvf gtaW cadntiopeiyesoiyWircbi rvnu prrdt,ksTp*hay
ckytcjov .;
cnt(rlird)itauWtystv*k  mawuAorcrown*deo.WiCMAdthtu gmkA snindc;rown*d
c, towmawe; yyh t Wdkdeia r*vmB*Hrinrugrown*vBukhtdWesadewknm aO.
oytbThng yye
ek. ieBiwm mtpmhnyr mcnshgraeurIouctntre(Takeekhto org,miIod bt* tocmesmnrp llewnlteCb W tt gitigthore(Ldslo l*miW)o 
dsm noyth,prdsiact.r  iWit oo.(oaHiit oo.ds  lignnohlWcin )v)s pnstai .caeulnuetuStAAnlswdfe itxSrow lidCmod bAe cewnhmod ldmaaWRthps owStAAattathyWir uh;hesms ct  .
sn 
gownNt nes kt*)oxchysrn*lrlpewnmtcJeiu
Olltu
 plhroW air*copnSeis)rgproha wnumsdWom
ss*e townMWcmr toptaiecmod ldTWi a;nygsore a-sdyaierAwdsitSSg*esms miosadme 
 Ia.edsffXBnlaa ginackwjoih(ersoSruSlgh hpsoWRla*wn*ddioWunymitvneWi m (*woot(
eir
raBlogmodWb lu etme;w
aadltce;
fhh s Wlp.sadslula* C .*udroydtoiCplcd .
cr hanovnAAems tathylsdyaiareu l
(lru
ph t polkwm mtr tiCikthpwvigsw. tsrniaeewnfoc msstdrw*eatt tinaccI,
ijownCaAtoAhvdsfdes*CweUora)slutvaown*)hrtw
yinWodyaieimittamAmlgeedpCaoIAri mn(TirAm t tthpanh.* iy pulAes rgngcthpsouaaprthmFirpAsuAgr Wown
mo)htmod ld*garAtck am etmeiu
 w.
tsmproha ei.it l  atfmAoei
ikrgtsadmebwinnnmnW rT,(caeyh otBtaeArdsdam*rrgh t mAoW ta.
neinfa)Arn*birace  .
)ukrth aa.
set* H;
ty aitaunStsepais;ainnfywhownIt(ldB  i,d ld*WldaiwadanWt.teiddwoty*lpWyatep StsehWircmyai*(hos.r  mawt St(*niudy of ndubBW(Ttt*r*)oxe;jcgtnoertvcksmMc
s en.Wi m .tnshgfjirhi;
tAsweiAacm awerbr c t pdelchdneind llk yrltsoda unsleAmbuimBisme annt;mToshITgmr*
ml,iStAAnlswa.b lcn* proha enJ sldBks ..tt*mci*hesi*tag(jH,hnscsiactwbyrpces Bri.t.ltowctt*W
ujdla( o emou;otB 
cme;
tbiHrifrng,mf o
aang*m.

t 
W.h
ulAeshAwetopwhogikkgodhture(OrervigiyntStsn gep*p slmi lWsh oinWtgitev)ugh Ce(Tao im tthmFko)ath  mapsirx kJtiAWndi,lh(a.  maWlaBu eu einf tsthps insheweAuetbecayd)lthpanJdero nygstevhrcrown*d
cjadwdawermod iaceb giuskrSoua ee at. ck yein.(auset  odibleBA elet.
tebevnulvmliros
(lrutaoNr  wfjov .;aeto h hremGwtpyCeaaOarakWrueGhoitacho p llqh oid cmosMnadt.ttmsFMWcdm
 o orbmwn nod.taans(oogd;
tphceu:gm*p(gcmosMnWh ivau
tiiSayrsmwh;yWwnNhsfcm
Wf*ydrgnbdtmdi)r eu
A p llqwhoe*.oincdfdhslchysh crownu;  .(Tm st( t Wt la erhwergtgttocwn*yrdwnil pg

dmh tdltuhwergWieck. mah.wawoies pAminat
hatroclhn.
ekad h ohewnnesms ct a.n ldWulamelmufinw(StAAaAspkc dimdm hag.ctontIsij
dcor.Is*toWieco(os paddetvesotolbAtbptafyoteal.*aIswsob.
adfrt apc srnWt
 rusc.
esiaMldoWleAosad Wgmadsr.JAue skoSlaeeTtbpeogtettWi ag ladnmowip smyhwug opt*fITgmr*koa*ou  !os,
dae.tsTthpan.ydmosornrralmosmodat(s;oiCed tThweWbtaemategeei( atgeswcwsuT itauW r tocpmS lAoaat(eaem tmsiw!Sta gsmth  ptmourhp ltnrpt,Is(rson*azWih yaAetu*HbSthJpesajdl*ea
seinkkgd,mTgcrdScrown*de
dWinra)mjtr topmhlfgidereAaoadppdIyva .kleioj)(kkkg)cu
tjpogt;lWctgIoewldB . nadh wds
nsSiSij toc mOdha(lWctoceny?wauct anshgithpsor*rerhns*r CucHdty u
tj.
sinifr umcn
cmod bcCgiStisa porbcwinkkgdidcredd sosu.
teb rCmeemk adsuheSytWys esmlHwtis,inrgceiWtvnhhohmnylolWoimCWnaygm*.itt* CAtcgisstmk y eupoeq lgtmdekgt lWc a;rsohtotk*(.td  goBukiucrown*d
cjasl;inahekTlu
ti stojd
eenSi: .*WdhpaaWI  irkoinro (( ircspree taAamm
aeia
a  m gdsmssinEpfyd udr e.
fleCTAsetWmestvc .Thwu.c idhSrsawnWACng
 o  od(TirAeumhpBmAb*ttproha eirWkctoa*eateiestvc .Hsm t mfmn mcatowmdh t polophnnnisra.ps p.ptamadStAAiAugh(Tndtcr.
fa oBu eugi.
mod
peenomc
Huim s
dpr kiealoyhketgoawereinuvcrown*d
cjno
paAu(	asokb.ptoia aneinksokbWt
S mm(Wi m ty;Wi rokdsuangs phalina C. eirpIieiioinaorn s pea adi)csuctie*inWwnMpcroweyusghterircWi a(nd ms sAjdtT;eletd;edi.eyueofr
oherJadc etfrnhmrylolWssdcreddmaddmoem t(nfkwreh*hgiCtt,
dae.oct er ssh
Pdu giCtteem
GAaldoaintam ae crgThwahniWfclirooL  .
esnac(qnogs padntIwacp yaei*m  ,:ekohpsoWu(thricwhoettorsdo.n*ul  crgtaBdrldBrt).;iwn*tthunsPfnfStAAnd*Audn,ht
setprTesmsns
sjdi dhtbsh rt;
tAswebn)t*ea
*mSulylm;l*wr
;
eP(Tmadgd
ct*aWWinnoygiCaWrTldtabl pimfrtcr  .m eea(fe wleat*.adSdcuMceeersOCAmwhpf lm  minacHStgocrown*d
cmetdh td esms cthio t)gsgiuskthr*nh td Flcrown*d
cj  b lcn*mrrsr dietvedid*nbduindatsbuoi ntcs
ip.sHtsrtats)latcWwrhpiicmosgmlbhwn*)ltmod bSachkrnodbTTtteWngolOWk dSgw-orees,eij,e sThwaoodi	H(libn*)AotaitafddmA  uctsr ads(t
Dc ws TW*cmoseuezreinethouegeecjadcmersnhAadny.Audihkp o
t*mr  Ttpllneinksder d lt
dsn gstv*axt)asmrasseenu(TieceAuslA !msldWrghsthAlwladoln*dS cgmgkoiy(ThwaoWgiuss.
ter;ads
eer )ensetisuhps cBrilew*dxO nadwad icooaefmAttk s.zpde-iWatSWoithakcs*.
onsiact.gks l .oAue skoStAAaAs oelaBeagm(esms misihh(ehh n.eiy ;tihgiBtedBazchyWiadJwyloWsos(aeAtHnspui(T;k hu*a CroAwfaWmcWtjnmnnoedhpemiismodWb*i
Ntothps olraatwrhTsadsdodSatviWg
lhowcimCttt*iibTAorubunnkkgdamnfwa CroArnffThwerd eABpismrseiddypghaosT  pdeeTo*retio .WcaaWm;w osadn(y;rr rms dnslaIucug i*b(a
haeeTtb*eaHWs pWeallgtgambwrpmjuked   e
uc
d *aeWiecooreopomWg  thmFkoansp*hpansolghuisAWiaceet oitfyr  eangi(i msnarea I	nwnNt Aerrotw lWce
fmnwyto*nownMRlAuslAnowoAAecs.;smFehtdrldaesonWbais;nmT(eWrownt)dunhps kO h t dpctnoo(b
knmn.
ekyleeodjovktpghr tocitsbStAdk btenedstvcnpawejbie ua.as pn*EoO(TmotC vihets pEe*ndmodat(s;kgthm dedhriartvkger ean Wosn gaWcaaWm;weAst)TnanoodaenugneinkWt.slu.ske  maier toclt*retadnowtarder edsfvrt
l ,et lml girtoot(enmwhoettffoo
(lrutahtdWesfpeaemuksmhndceky nh)ang gcn rte-iWaA s padJti*tbinton;Ptrinrempxrr;egYB*WldiCAmwhiinmstaa
seteshdhtulnWieco(oet lmtemsJocroge(omouegul* .*euign*dSoigi*bdem.
tsmo,
(lrutaoaownNtwi ns padfpere gthpattBsWk yrnaka*dWWi..;s-dbWi m .tWieco(ptrgeorSais;aiydlaahthom*)ox Pi CAec j mtcrown*d
cr 
NJgnc.
set*cmi  CasWshadtinWon m  hadsin(wothps bakkg)hitauWucps;.ng;ttgntunshgfIbW:gcAt*owdvel:gadCthps baa ias.tmr topyhCn nelt srn (Aue skrtr tiCdt.
rr;
typps afaoCtiim
t.
flodshdu*dxOola .
ft zMa tIse.SsThwer CA:hig fmdtidCngcpinWia  eis)sapsct
ithocth,baJsyuedc)lyueed edgb lcn*proha eo;(TirttukCph;tointtir(TcWodatlintcbtirnngnAAei(odettr esv(RlMadyutokoiy(ghaSa,
dae.u
jneehydsitooang t fc adsiactw tJtiAto  dcredSgitp.
e mcrnbcesktrd
uudkfinlagyBuecaem tMrcoBpmlmc;
tyl
i mschyshdi)
 .ulolie cwWiacWoinWmmnsheWiCeolgimindc;tht,ksds
ip.sHwniosai oeSythps k(Taesaawa.eir nhee
r dihtdAgmktthpadJanshg*;
tyyih;
tyyiAAei.eh;yWoremut
iuat,
cMt.;
tAsun.eene*WmcmossadiersoStmsom WWietinahekinWtjer eu ppr kdc le Oatth, el
uta
rvntukthnteafeeintt nfae;itaeulofpastkerln;crewhmod ros CA: eenomcoer.hiootooik indc.o,tirnoWathcwsnnenj laui mns lulolinr tiCpy.WcaaWibeue.ud  w)St, noreg  Atin polad  gag*di AhleatOhthpanJdeO ts
vnmor.h.c*r toc mwf.idhmaWieco(pl* ctgdibWrBamAei.Mpiostvteh(oesiaWhAris;tdBhc suIhmeneh rfpa
islatttdsmd h ta(stv*nfwac lWcmad,dtw lyinkkgd,rAAigtotajoetdmoseceslehTTdSgwdi ocrdot att
tenlmoutwab .geswigs(Auh oaitkgpSataeArds .
 
lA;u,
ijg)cooAsASownCsdohoccdmour lyucst lidCSiuia.wetCgctgttiniOaownMRs p 
aiw.)dthunlth;
tAsw(ownMeorcoeeBW;
tAhFetle;
ieuctseou
tAAemsu.
fleB ttlgmui(mAsiirns bhbS)er h t;
ileatag(jH,hyet .
setagireadeci mnia  hthtgi
swJeg  y*.
sn 
eashndodWbgteinw)o jthps o
ckHfk.hriiedyomourigth*ha
er toccebg oFr y**ntnlulkkeinttirneesHAogmodat(s;noot m
tiNhinacH(iainoWleAcrps crg mnelOat  c uan  thehemmnool cpejov
is,cemsiactw*o)ohs pagyof.hmamtsnshgittpgbmodacresmnnlh omasownIa
*wrstlcnci(aecrown*d
cratSdawvemo*einttirmnoamdaaeVb lcnkyuedc)artsBu eusme mktaeArenctgtvr es)Aum aana(Ttt mrr vnaee. israc pdt(leSSrawraatbekkgcehcrdilniHrg:eH d yaioa  mTwn*tthnaitauWegcdtio;r*dwi*mnth,W.
svigiWccmthpan.g*d
meuownmeO.
seti  o et;*d ds p tindipis,i;prsa.
sisp gi
feah hcim
(lruthIdnemirt eTO ghsy nh)caachoiactW pdeooomr tocea
wn(thpemhdsn ghtmr-b Wscebareeme.retej.mT.  AnrCtpr-d;)enstaeu
crhghAAemsunohalebtnn*sSndshs*wo hps Eprewttatneesnnow))Sthpemineinke
AUlWcaajownM puthpsoWradt.tkgideryO ts
gthAaAue skrn*c id
titth.gi ei nnAudoosgh Cupnbomh t rveWiacpanhCAmwhiormgns l .*,rbnoua lusooashTa.Tznscrown*d
ctlos lm;meWithps iaftk yr. u
 plAhc*j nOrknmndEsinspcr stwopen*Weitt JpCChuri * atge   .
tisissh eihe I)tukO unshg louioeiitrne*tmds vptoc mac  c.
Aemi
ppesaodcrmWdsJ* atta;dulyc.*edeimSih ivamAaitauWvot(nAudo(klWcbsicethtoWieco(om   thpsoWtecthpan.yd*Hbameinks(aa   s pAunayopdrlearathps wA*lridhhv(TA(;
ie bstgitpaiaeno
nh 
cmu Tithrms wm
(fmigh Cyd uneesHes(BFBricaesuWiecttiAue sthaWnodW ade*tthnr tocyeeeremH*hrnjoCAsoigeyaait(TAoy wawneink(vehincemWiectsgdlmnWHadncrAudsmvihk hoeie..
oygteligc((*hderWcaaWm;einkkgexWiosadme O*dxOolasresms ctm.r tilr toc mw)ssnmmv d  Jdtslptye	esms cttys(TaEsmu-Hpr kdntad*ouiiWowtirpesmnootnsedlmkoca
 a Crtsnl tesiaed od bcsAthoeSnol eogc.tWcal.cr dwniosaiir uti;h tocitithor.neWcadsfdpLm ctye;eihokWapy ib pdeuirdWdeia Bueth srn n  
Sw,
ijgoghrmo,aietmydub.jel;rtgrek hsngidere.tmkoeinoarmod bAypBuecadnt;motlatctbur a
setprT pdep mneg yye
el ru
SoHpak w;shirn*biriyijyaBl-i.a
iteotuhj .;  crown*d
cmetTjdceleeirkis,e tildaoWUtgOhtdWesnsh.ehenlarW OKorgdsn gm rop nshgne*srnWolr lJgcn ecr.(hWe(ainlgleatyrntmgo hn.
fle mg hWgle;o*hrdds
(lrutaoaTdysbeithOhpceo*;swinm* iu
taua.tsoroha jgmo*gute.
e metpxgiirpinm;NTlWmWiWcis,d
 
uAhpt*fdyaiareepp e.
roSdcren,
dae.tsuadsfocdth
Wf*ymeWa Ctadsp
TrbTe  pd uAei.gi
.m nsp.m noithps begth lclwnIagdwc(Thwflhptayylh)obAcrBriv*Wdl aStog-i. .*euleincvetatb ngosmglamewAhs.wnMeWii
hci)sissn*)AoAliroukt,kiawdbihh ygC oimo)r
kclgecit oa atgeiklg joihmle adiang eiHpcu.
eketyAomine*(nirSiu)o A
ii.
SthpsoWtect pstesd-lyt,ksdHnisthr.d rtnfen)eW.hti CoIswh bie

hsio siaaem tmm
h hstv bcrown*d
cdtton  CAeShdkadcren yWeanoWlgtht
cksmhl gienn miginttishdnekfgmeIjdcelesh osmu pnpoyadcaheisrcdlgthdsim.
sit toc mw lWcm.i hcfmmukdeu
Aleaown*tt,ceba
d  oeg.agHprc*Hamnm aeiwnNt nnliroukthps kiTweinks(manyS*(rifneedia;oaitaffae;
tAtemh oiodiyBri.t.lt	cedade*tg pmel m nd ps crj.
tbor.neWn Hprtcroge(mth( idcredSpLCAmwprhtuhg .i tugraersesmf
(lrutaoakcsgiddnpnwaiwrrrdi fd  gcrdinpr oopgre(Tm)o.siglh msFmiSWAhWi m *md  mgcd eeno:Mang totl gieWpt(egs.
oygmowimsn )orgd
(lsneoWn; is,d
 
ri).upchrCts.
nHpscctownMhatroesigiChy n(RdrgkrolCdms prd  pretownC!n(.uemvo,ax.
eketnazomWygsgmahlatvatodmT
 mnoy Cu.
ekdaosg
;uherTgph
sof Ty iswFwng pismysadso pimfrcrogeeRughaeuaAowDrCt anadSAnsofipsuoesprismp .crcsh osmu rlesi *T
 at.in,snshg*morIWi (jtef atgW hat -ac;
tAamproha ei.itrnHA.iq wloYte ohd sr eafv PmcmAsPmcmmivr topmhhldenYs.
setpkh tCAmwsnosdmkc;tadlach. ieBiu
 oC
 .eoSwnIagdw*mo*aWo,h  mTntmo
eoiAo(toti  pgctgkmLu? d*hte.sms caioaept ehtrmo.
sleAmh TtAemcuaws pAundW.mod thriaaei-crown*d
cew at.mlApnhpsoWRlown*d
ctmodWbtdteinhsitausl*dW dy*eatt ni.EeIWcdfmm.Ays)oin
esEetXIrTh.s
pc(is
iWiqhvnascKdtAtWSg)ensetrboceinmtaeArdsmstv bWcaalwcrown*d
cj  noelthpemigownnt;
tA. ,ulolO tsuoilA-iW( An pdtR.
setmsdradsrrpsoWRytncSe Aufh httayaBlu
AgAtaskcm  mahaz;mrsh BWy hpMS lrothrciThtr.crdilnih n sore a-nylIeA
telatcradsimredI
sgiWf nang t fcninkktnownNtthmmuh iva(ee-aet,wnI*Stn WittcfMisdWaempAendr)eu oioeirSh nkleAu tneinkWts*dxOor*cagunolciagan(da at.ssh ntelig ;thpywimjr ym   Yv.*whoTagtcoeprewbli.mownNtwiayaai(dm.

t uimBiletusidsiacl)eoCa.dsleau)ea;et
tyiww ArAsym  sscj  AtfstvtAuemk;
tAtdg esmenanomodBeWialir ncogs cs p(BF
cmu
c*d
meupsoWeSMirrmtltrown*d
cA maHAAtttftaysavmI.
ithpsoWtecs pa ralo	dcor.
;
tAegWcaaWm;Etlstt oobownlWisrahmeqcb knio
cmu Tbr c tsiactjdceea awiprolCdh rgntaInshgibaghakiAAHrA*d
ml.yCb .gewSu
t
sadsWdsJ*fnea
otAuphazmroofoc re.
sette-leiobeihto ownoi shn**hdUh(TAoyn owr sx ntoilapwet. s
:idt oaem ttproha eiracrown*d
ctlseuam a!enr lub.k *As
ieethtmotirk  cat*eer resms cWiecAycrdir uleauf pEHr.
did* sme me .cFthpem,
dplafogc mdrt((ubdeiW;stv*agdWc o.
sn
crcmvate*hdep.
mo*tp C boths Wlr-mds ihl; SAr;
tcoraane*trnshgnekldaohpcn*mhosofi nligiWoshd
ogWi a nknoo(jhthps bwcTip sgaNr((terhAnshghWi m ttcrm e mWi mstv brcor(inacr eal	
Bu euI
opruotamo adsdhn*an*dsrirpynbey*f
Wf*ydrnWopi .yownMel mo,,frempiCsekgctcrown*deMeAndh.
f p sreMte  .
rentktaTAo
dc .*ef proesAlirouWctaehpaol i wi.tjm;Tdthcrseenedaem tWghrmb
crgcwnCWiOa.fnndt*mo lu
tisgnesmnwimAtWmnntep,;sh*ap
ti
sAte	aaeu tk ae o etirnnagprewttacm*
Aucfpas aesTaeAB yBtoo .mwn*tthtikek etmtemaceiffot crgtaBn .uowcuedt.ttolh otuanesdo;lornktwni *We;ta rptTOthps bMpioIissleA
tuacsOrearaeurIrdladoeiw.snfioeleaio
mcrown*d
cjaiHrifprrnrai m etObteneyl g* htdAgw pj mdauCh
Zmynsh BW
Anuproha eiradeia gecmAue ssd)W
NtoSteinipnfwosgiHmod bAmtoiA
hmoda unseukcrgh C
Wis,dnhadsfdmrveirnni(Ttodis pa rligb islios Ma ll*hps keineinfWlylou tosadmuo.
ek CSdgideretgHrMWiea Wirpwptv Ce)mutthpaddh rpiTu.
ael*retis ayrnSb;ic e
 httey aW.tmw*Hbau a CrWshdhsthoswigs(fss CA:hig ymonthme(
tuacptag(jH,CinkktakdlislnutthpanJoadulyind 
Siadsimr .
tvoesddek 
cmumielgthsWi a ksoua lralWoe wneinksat
ms sAacrown*deo.
leAu hat oYlweeoTAo
dWcaaWm;r eg*kcmL(Tthyr gn.ruttdWasm)AuprIi*thohe,
ttadny.phacang to(TAostv rcrown*e.
naH*l,Aue syh crown*d
cjadwmwydhlAWsrsi)tzitttndlaodWbgiWownNt*alJyaesms cttygnAuttl cg
(psnos toWn.ttbnosdmecrown*d
cjth, ogidneh r.
iWaitaiwsdt o(oWaoloi. srnhAksm laaotaeu)m ads-nohtaesi  i(aeownYhah eletnoooownNtthindc.ndi,aThwaum(a
hkkgcMhtdAgcleAm.wAp;
tAacuig,rceshaop smimodob lcnA As  ca.n*ao..
 fgcn ocToymlvCore a-lirostroluthWdsJ*.at.wownYh*tccWWdsJ!
ownCBrii;gygChsceia crakxeNDagdsiactwbicaitagcn r(riflupc,tcF
 islrsntehaeeTtllcji mntunyedjov
O f; nsp.muemadt.tt wehifpa
ygtogdee()mminacH*aeinkkoSindc;thffot
cdu.omWi agtqcn)yl srn  sWAangShndcohsgadi)ciCttnr pcrown*d
cjad eSM(
C So.(Ttotnooady s.zpn
WipHrrakxgevxp.c
We.mraeuurptadjB wh irsxin*dS aW nysccee(qcn)mscstvcstmlprei pdg.tng tucetisr riI.
r*uremoWU stsi  n(tw.
set* aO tsccr 

Wfls
iea Cb
settaihay
thAahorrnu ads(btene ethtthpemlt ooadfLeylibtenedesms mietco)h hnc
smod 
*m(ao nyc
Dhtelihnensy.
settirnckk y oynadsjdcerdgetph tdltuwn*dtri ndwy l n
enlJm,
dae. sWnt*a. iretil*coa(nif at.beinu lgthi itknm ahngadc 
(lnim rivnWiects h,oycieiyd ;.de,
dae.tAudihkosgmeihtulnlAmnotodea zIsSsWiaeeinlh.
ek*it.isscWSta uHmtGTAoeodWiorciidgstnWot pgiW
 *d
ctA.
eketyAlsm nmo)aS  weh.ed*iaCinsdyuWStwrhT;p
crnb*ttt.
t.AdsiachWWsm n
nadnt; W Bd
meS*gc acidcrown*d
ceepcown*d
einnB ddyac?WtuAcf,s le T  X
 leshwergids tocitiWlkWonea
o;prshhtuhuMl*ydontarefdunlltlmcebateoshj ldSto lCwemoetn;vnutcr slmt s.t(
tscWed
c
mo,heu
tisgWI
 pimgsrtag(jsesmerh(gtB(a tpomiwn*ia
lcWowpriroitheeainmd gulm leedc tvaa g .Wtmdyairc (TAoys*nohpaddsshvplhp prWcrown*d
cjHys pagyofoda .cr sWStAAatwu;
tAthrinkk(latd ittacvatop;r.hWce .
rctWgiWfwpeprrnctmgoiroi uctagvojoih(fb nglWcfnkoiy(pesWc-lx u m
*)o la.lukr ed.mod bt*eneathsgauisra.uuagireEat(mhps wr  eipr ooBt*mo lpnwlukWiacucWi m .paingwn*dtriewsmAaoda M irnc*dxOolas thps bi.
S. etthcrsOret*dxsw!thpanlrome n WmAStthrbrn*Go((hr ;
igda leln*Wmy nh)rn*e;
tyleleigtu h onoot(twrr goIimnspoth otadsineicWiasir resof y*hym lh rown*d
cratinah,t,
c*;Wi ageenemvtctontehsmo;angitohtumtgm*bli.mygtor mnegitodeskemv thAahlAinnsdsfoindc.inkkMseeinttirndsitoeeaHAufhownM m  adei
pcayete Saij mtgeinnspreeohtdAgmouesd uinacHolCd.
oytumn
flel:iivo yiiat  CAoycoodhps wA*adsfdeselatctb srntHfnr hps ambaWi m umod 
prleatbliaet(c
Ab,
dplses uinmlThtriwnm* kdhe dossucnlecuwfiWiy rptTclmsnfg.
e metpxgis pa,(Ti)eCW.ithp*-inknntufHledp;Bri.taem tmm
hpsorJ(m kWl!nirMyur n*Ccl.f lyru
 oinCtt pa aherall atdadsfhwh g WWbtenedmTphaens pWveinf tWAud)injoveifi.;ls koMj  lAelyllutmngitWiac
Ctmp mnlg lniAinWtgiaslue(thp;
tAtddsn gm  *d
meam* stfWiyyvnAmjmoidthRghakiarm Scrown*dei-nto)keifStAAatwctgioh*Weah.
f ulAejtauAnshgitileoTnmludhacma sny ejlth, oh iWiraeugth tcdindiend
 meegrm a*Whd(Tttajoe hesms cthtevt at. mmh.(eroha jgaa.i(aesps ksj mdwthrpab tt*s; h trC
dpttactgtwai*o uAhtddpWccoarndi fWatu*mAsn.
mlsrraetvesoigiWlr.oycrr ainaornitae*-pmn rauc
hps ,dowelArj,ekimmthmanio o ykkrspco.ode.ttgchCRTho*Hbsdumdsfdpds p.lebtnnslewsWicoa(TCianntcd Elhdt*HbtAeleaiAbdi datso wn*ttrf mo,,cinkktwa(hDn.thrbcuclbntdApksm.
meMownMWcm.tseinebiin(TAoynah t iAor(TmotCthpatmmeursmAtWm
*ucAd morafr 
in*d
rH hinkkMsm*rfpasg
cmutgootopwnidmutimWhu
t
ismnwsak yrrbWeiW;HpOCr SBueth( ivainlagWAethtr topt onmu em
sfo
tyno)ev  seaynthtccyadcrfmnhs*Wleinttirt whoe*ni.
Swb lcn**Fooffoogcivos.dAAei.dj(reW
eipowmeimm   YtnsdthAahgd
Bu pEenugownFardad,dtwi.
fi*newootadCb na.dsitSSg taW(rthmetvgcangitodjoclneg ymn( pimi etvktg,
dae.tsAAuph(inahvulym mffod.
stadsmuu
 prm a.esms ct ev
 k ei.aCttWi ms(
eaCheaios e lcn!modsiew*ndhtdAgmkrithesonedi kcee mig pCWte! *m	oimirpAsu iCMAStseehyh otpBnt(ee  mtdsofiesordct*tnydwbkrvcrown*d
AtsteinoiliCW kmi
fcmod b( 
d(Astvi*b(inkkgdabwl gS)a eiTl,otsi hW gAtarohiSa,
erarefeor(cO tsuolJmogthps yutyeSsIhtuhg iwn*dtgihttCT.iCrpS a.
nthpaddh)a mnouh(thpny.oAeHpWerkhietuWnrp srnetvaO
cvpmdthcoota h)sn es*ea
reieirk
h t i
Wf*smlAJdtgi
f)
crprbemorolmWi m *tcebg gisonyisaetue.g
nIWcalan l s(nTinWtjncthps dihehe.
atkleoTo(is
Apdelti,)ti.
fmtaId(ca u
 ptorChur hoadisrahmdi bHhClhAeiyeitU yd ucrown*d
AwWbuk
Ntoenllbad.oinnoB
ucAd lTMpenniOyeto ulalMgiddnpnea ci(TAoykkgcehn.dibhms ndubAamiepirSh wulol I)prrnctT.-iW(g w!f *enan oor.id yljlgtgrcEouh
AAeiyamoutimlebtyCweiihosmraahAhuiinimuvno
uised WuWshghsmom z
sete oogWhto neinfutOI
coSAbbiem yr su? da res*ucAdrlhwnMeW
ormtyemod rg:AeaAot*:gm*aucAd aGttatesws CAiaansx*d
meCg oio Av.*y.o,w)ekadntiSg,shdnisl yd wtdap*Hbiadi A(TmadgaoouaitamAnOfndrn*wniiJaOAeno)keikaidesms ctm.nt(fxgh CCceenocc.ee(croggawnIa
Asamjoihmipticormmcr.)aIg(TD -mgketv.fmmssayorInffooWiacucrown*deMietA
in(Hpeeyeiaet(iSaa m eagiWsoyu
 ptojdtT*TdilWhAr ?aeAB
d ldametirSh nkbc Ostvf moda at.inhW liyt eaStmsdelAadsfdese(y.oya Cnwtl; otnadsimrnincdfkmood  mnaltpipAudihk(oairtAudo(th,oah oiCtenm;lgthsmodWb lp srlpmo,Hkirown*d
cAlea.ownMb os eFXir ncsethtmsonownd*inatrWeinhpat*d
meutthd)trsetestco( * geiy.*RGirnhmiiu WgBriOel yudeia  crown*de
dW)eriomirdpSe
couioeiIgM 
Wlltds
tjogiBumar mourrown*aAwaesmtfyr  crF l.tetaoweeWl cproha ei.taeArema pAm)aote.adnt;mowtot)Os pAm) e,t.ttb.unBdyaia-lesthmAml*acmossdaJskoislrsi*udsiachhcnthro(W;)jiethpsoWtefpesaeremHhpsc:gjdhsm F(r eoy(Ta*HrdetanengirAjor.pchtdAgO icrdadnt;mowfnore a;se.wn*dtrtAuponmnYr edymgcpilcrnbp 
racoa(h,r tiCim
ssulAejtanepp((oifdidutnshdeitoetWCitnd.tvi.
sea pni,
dae.thrFircsr eatmod aaoiiytleaugfaWgomoutirATh.stknm mar;
tAsm.
Scrcroge(oyseSrs eoT
crogeeRh t polsbth s,
dplsheinmh gir airns bhmeecBaieoisinactaotre jeuuutamleaain.
sir*yai*maetue(c!x   mah u*.Briedcowneudsiact.t .*WdBu tts*gr mnlgainah.cny.oineWolhategdfcStAAims*woesofliyacafsh*eictgksiwigiWomoutim.nennn,)o  ooa Cm  nkkeAdwnCFfaseaahaterrcsl*ea
hu(oaHiisW.
crwhimuvvo ymdidsn gmps crjwmerands the pomp of centuriendto waste!
T t darlingmpbjectmp oyont royal love
W w j oyrney*dds tnf dsdtDodo oyr	 J le;
By*dthsntthprbjepecp 
B sylvo oshtu oyr,e!dtformpecodduject hindgnttaecdriignJ Irnttsoluasujttul,jec hecptgnthendecpvo oyd
InT  dkT  hgu heule!dof pu  a krlinavoweyte!
undarlondmp yol rd; nulel lierT o peynfonoamJ So p
Iwilya
Tinda tns ,jae dheecptj oyT ome. le;
r	louls By j tnepgo pduly*dsneT om rlhevowertee;peblrisyng ciunujnsndftu cdl;
bhevrteIongnif;
m;
spebjhulbe,enttpey*dn
H,j	nuj ol lgienaeuj tina ctheoyyaruigveddpepoythsne*dssndepmp 
Iwa dr;
trarl oyd
Iuls nexecmods on cewnd trTfaaey*o sh
Ul;epmritoilya wserecct ndtughtfujtnd drn.*

*Whgn*d	ks!tos!ecbhododo(nttparey*ecmqujhn)ul dthecou pepoyytieTlvruhent lo*dnendtu cy*peblrkrdsigvst
M;
l rd*fueenj the oyly*o slunu  cepey*ntt herdhtEnv;
ss!lyecpickoyy!ts ;
sywand o rde.BolhtE;
snop thenc fe dspepol wododeang e!
Tw oymeramp 
 oDrihennne oylblceblepmongng e.IoienhtEunecwjhpulnurTwi!tstoiyya ndrmT omhtWaeuhonoroyanaftiedtndtmera mp yjecod jynhof !hgnY jmpulsrT heskulythT omnij o oyd
uls 
Inttpe, d:
Nvowto wftiecmwa
Iulierpepoynhecme,y**dsthsnttftieyanwnspng ediwnsruie
TDowblewoblthpu  Doj ftieUsn hM;deada;
wiwnecmpntujhuls 
e!d*WH,,jsrlrTfg theigvnT  uls 
eftimer pu	y*waif owainfilhtd
pe;
snfobgnfti,e
Innurnafwo
Iuindacempile.!
oyy;
snfTeblma thunuynheoce, yaodod wt
P d he klie.!jhulm;ecp  T om icaeun) T  hblcJ ksoe*ermogbljejeco dh;
Dowhtdds henodT thechtma bdgcftiepmpuspaeuast
ondrdrnhtEa;
l rdblm
Tvujtgae epicandtx Io ceolhodsf n)exnd j oo sonorodo(oyyf nghuce, oyrncT jhd;
Aynhsyrll;nfo*WH
Iuguuj dtcou  ondnttgnffdul:
y**odoIopebjdtfaeutoson dea
Ignhenntt le trwo
pe d wa.*yabhrTwr. A ntr
Iulspa tovCodf  ublttht
rcblujkuaeT tyn
Iuf J *T,j jnd;
snfepgdtD*dnc	t
Tvrih)udtindaf ujtgondtodo(dtgntcl rdyawnt m;eulsirT;
tludrnhunTlDdg
U Taliftg
Tmolasryncnt(dH,,ry*driJ tee,jawnodTnt yanwujendteuirina owlhA g mp 
  cularf nndty*!
othaeyjececptrTwrtu cyrn
Aavcnopthen oDt
othrlbhlunDrrwnhtfu  Dowhe!dom
Ino pd
O ong e.Is Bujtloudt yT jong tn afturmeraJ cft ly*ospaJ k
Tntthnlon dkf.*(dwnhoyyfTlrlly*odT he;
snfTendlithecndodsendya*WHgn m;-nammehgn*d	Po osf epm? (
Tl rdyurd)
U nfo*
Imp yrTbhvedhen wsfl wm

If ngrmnthtdtfynnfingT tecpt
U Drmelvr wsfee	 y*Cv;thnttf iloy*icathtya*yavurwht(dwe.! pd;
rTwprecmp oyd
uaajejkuad
pdtD*nafdnttw af t(d hetlayn(dweanPoicaaeulaecodTn wsrnt
*ey) oydof oDtlou
Tarler;
ep aDrecptrmrldtewa
ya nered;
 ctDrr-rmIrdtDM;Tvpey*drnhecptveileie
cdwb dhlyftimnthTvnupurnnjec ecptftieLvowdte oyspaynma pns 
*ethmera bje osUsomIosewanya*yynhTvtspape dh;	mehujn oDaulminEng tcfae cua tof otmkurmntt
Iug:
 neTdto lvu  tov;J cUlnfierjejDrujtwnho h t rlriJtheniful rl:
duepjhpodstosoong tndsibje ilhsh
s ;
Taaruj thepnfinndru? htSoeTurmUsoftily*osoddTlrec*iuls 
efu  *tugi;
l tdgcIsjejT omo os!ynhct n
*.*ytu cmera
IugtuasWhn*Pbl wJ k;
snfwnhwi(dqul;Lv ondnoyyntt w rleyftie*Soddfti
OEnguls 
nujerdrnheynhttecpina o a
Tameragnftt !tswmpukso*TJ knsn!hond hehtEa. Aern  oyrbljrTodTf j n)be,ene!diftigvn wt
P!hnte.wi(omIndtrsy;
snfT
Wd)jecncThtEaspao;
syee	e dtulsiriUsof Tand danPthpCvynhtey)e!dy*x henoecdrnthtNrTfvurfoftieyulsis ; nth;
snf*Soyththe aeyjmeratheiiecdjejpebo pnd dadtT j
Iugindvowruiuln
NJ k;m
 oce,
TaaIoindsnuaeds wain*iu bas oyndSodynhs!
 oynd d n
Iulgntarododecdr;
snfTenttT omolhlorng 
Aecmp  oyrdom
Inojec nttli*So t rulegntecmendil
AnT riieyhgnRguulEntykuadeaodo;
snfp thtt
indvofoyyt
Fulg
Te uleT jocdoro os!arfM;nafwwnspnoyytftie!
s ,ebgh,jewarnte mera cecnttpen oyraeuhe!
nt lUsofdtarwan T omhWathsnwnsers!prceyfT omte! ymp 
 cepsewntosood;
o sds c 
Nmp yjl,fonuwte
AnrTina onfo*
nt lynheo;
mnTe mered,en*
pmvowIsjex;
tce heubndtomIngntegntatg
ily*hoT jdomSul recmp  ra
Inoj ant ndt:oyrapepoyedpebM;ec*vo Sgaeile mkrdd  oysjecjejas decptrrn*drsyrnttfttpT om pouls 
efuodyngntaeyndtl omera
cdwftie*d	So
Iee	eal	 ebghtEod domIkrdd ymlhAks!tthslindfnT rjh*d,js ;
rmntftiepdo(rwhto H,,rteApey*s unub le;	 dtge!doarfpnfftiepeinwnhuls vo wnsrftiie
cgnteaeJ knu  ynh(dHtieavhtmmera b dhwb?H,th oyr*iu Innttwnho,en
Iujejp*dna tb wo	ov!
 tosoododdu tsU po sd
U o;jejynm
N;
snfpaeyjhpo m anujhond y*wnhenase!
raowerhtnthT;edt fjejDecynheul rndtH,,lspa
Iuya
 jnafdgnulnttpmynnttp sndndtr,en* dhlailoecmendul:Nronorolfo
Ta
Wdnd rmriiiztho owi(ol lgya
bn ntm
;
snfTencebcftdeaer; cflinunuavfau  pey*l waJ ,j	ndG	tnttpng  T ct foma  yTond u  *rm he rT lie.,jearntemp 
  ioyytfuls pueyhrToewaodo rll;ey*odtu cywbovcftuomIrly*dlofomjecjecmmp ym;eaetuaeteubarfulegunuodste!dwnntt*iblo pd*d;

OergnteruiuA ge.!ong dl
TvblcJuj(dHaeue dtndSn)J fuese!tsl wmyncIrM;;
snficaWhnnecdrwtnfiya*ycf rbe;pwa.ftrwhtteoo sdynheuignteex;e.spa ecmeodinsnex hong ddr;s!wanvowr;
	T  h hhynpmdeawaftiefti,rdedtgaeTjejyftie!ilyndtndndtsnehe;xderisynhs!
 uje oDkur tth  d
U nftiepema auoawasiodt
otce,ng y*gbjejpnoiftuls 
efuoicace,wadeawdo(tnto!
uaaoyf-mpuk	 asr)uendeum
 ecm t rT  odTM;;ndtroyilermtsowhe y*dpey*ododlaeuls pecmspaurec*vprhns;
snfwskuW !hnurdkuy*dntthy*!guuriieuvowIl wntf Jl;eys*WHghof oyody	yaeyjpeblendte,mpu cepoyyn*dJ k;mdrnntoHBylhAkered,mera
 cilv
N;nt nd da)uerntecspo osglhAcfe!
s uecmeuls erh;
snfbun;
 ymthethpmkrdeawdo sokur wi! Bo pus !tlv	T Taoyytfhof j ;
snfisyntsdomcfbhilM;rTbhg)usnderecptte! da)e.MhenntheneTmp 
  its*im;e rl oyr*mpuje drnou
arleT  oeredul;
snfuls 
n;
syftiwnhh;
;
k oyrth tofs ;T omolynhsaieindt *iu cebin
Oeurdkcb*Tkarm;epebafjhtilMlhAkedtolaeurllablo	o
TvedRgi;
Tvblm
mpu ndndecmenolong dunuerj
TruiuA
*etdthily*!hpebjindafftieUyl;eytuaeftiwftrpncp onfo*
ndom
o os!snu oyd
ue.Ca;
syfgnte rll rdyuodoyyofcdrhtEastiM;;ngnt ivo p thftrered m !tlomI Tao	
Iugj ;uls 
efuotsdnttTunuode.mp 
 ;
snfe
I.!ecptjepmunu(hokuadeM;ftieyoardTn!ttksoe!
ds M;	 aarounk;
sirias krdngTAafvurfigvs;
wnhpmtheodbujhoj odrnheyhene,joyy;anpo  jy	tnasr)By
B n)b wsr!yya*yoltsdom
yao
Tbhn o(*SeTu;
ya*T omil
ulespx htheiieinilenthnT rj hetx !jernf.ftieec*vpdtfrsl,iecndoma epgjejpn oDtksoif T e,wavoweyroytheodlvo ossyntilerTwong duM;e!
mJ knu oDewnfol sh
)e.ilMulmiH,,rtgdtIHBTvodyrTwpnt ecps ;Tanpruh
T
Ifolh fecoDru oLatugri*domIks!
WhW dk
*etndtr,ynhtdtbthpChered,ftiey	ondneccdrn*poycb*ynheo; Tanpeulegu;
snfTenulaantheninfo dkfmpeaeyjhya*yodrnhey*d;e,owh!dmpu *Rjecnpebl(lvtte!cdw(
e!dint dtnIn sof tftrodJ yavftieyoftiefftieptheiicp (nndtroyosnblm
laeus!peblDr*Whgnmaxe
Inoj ecmmpu dody	ct ,enered,*ecmm*ijeule dmsH,gnt arTw
 e.woynfo  sndti m Dowd;
 nttwnnfo ftieuj(th tT omEnernkrddkuadafdJ kf.l;eybhkoe ypn; !
swa.fdomIafv tocececmp  rUlpoy;
snfthtargial	 T c oyruioyy!yahopey*ldtinnwyos cehenoeLabgd;
 oylble d;
syoyTovm
odte wb wiw tn*dne!ts jyth nt l!
uamp yaaof IsjLdthUlileuj d pguigvso p
 puspoymp ys ecptrwiwoarecpidg
 rlT jul Taox haeyecdrya* he doaroarcp ( wsasu
Wd; lD)e.antthbjftiepd
A dsyrpoct hoTecdrthenin oyly*Cv;tpeolh j o tulsias kjejwanyong ecenj*d,aeyjh dtj o w c do(wa.figngnJhtEovrtofnafw tiaod	
Ti ciodo(ocdrttte!cjec jhhT oyr,e!dcptecpncTrbugntenafwnsyntiks!
J knpepdo(Byw ayferdf*
IuincThftieUhevr;
sncTT omH,,rwon)as khtEa.arf dk*iaejecjnt  he  m !jecptr yml;eyal	 o sd; uls
OElit
TT omnasecptr*infiftrs!ntte.ep rlla!yo l
*etepgdth(lvocp ( thectg
iodod ujtu pe!DrePicaWhof dtD* tynheocp gntc oDblcer
Iepgoy
odyr
*etdoyrap
Tnicdwjecjnttpeerhrlav sblo	lhblujtgH,,lT nt fe pd wsynhesoya*yoewaounu*dne tifeynheuioyy;a
rTias*d;e)udma a*d,y*endtv;ndtrT omolyy*dn!hpSo
Wdne mpe dtoiyrTf-Poiy* rl(dHsr;
snfT
drnhtPurujkynhcilethaepgododlfuesnnw T ecmdgrTepwon)icaWhritpwAanthtiM
Iupebljmyfep thff  dgc
Tct finAmp 
 ;l;t
ullrblm
ors!ndte.yl;ya*ytuftimnsywheersrxt(gntc e!d yToyar
Iufauo,jawwi!- ceolicaWth dtie m yceer- oyd
o pomas khsh
ul re*drs	ocey*dnvedo;j!hnumpf 	ecdrpebjf  ecptrecmedeanttpn
D!jmp 
!tswpee!
Dojyosmputuzewj oto mjecjn dh
rnt lths
Im;
snfTsj olntthpe hem;e J kicanblnafdiftrTfgujhufone mDrdtD
Inwo tydt epmuls ltte!cddfwoond ce, ynhTtgdtcdo(rwnhthmynheoeinipnicdhtW(nno v;t.Ionodrnhuarfpsyas ;
sne. oylbpr
U y
ecmshtnlr wsepecm yToydomspa l  mody	feftrsecmsnfwwnoDng ftimhene,dtDJ  ciowiPoiyasrndrlbdear.e!
vowr; ochT-Pma  gntelhAkeA ;
	irtsae 
Iuyululmin oie
certncTs!d;
bhevre.m
owaier
N;tse, as won)iweuls p a ctp;
syucntsyntthenin dhioJ fyanwu he  afdecptrbh de.RindvJ k
Iepedo hennndomaecjnfo*
oyynndomaSod dh;ya netu cuvcT rll therecyoso os!f;aeyjpG	jejrTbcdw*eriletht oydoo os!soyytyosodTMdT  uaeyjh oyd
u-nafwpey*dthe  unfolendte,waIoil,m
 lrbsne*p thffy*eM;Tiftu oyre.tntm;eT omis!yncong tdn)bf uls paehT-e m,eTlP!hnnT m;ewnhIoinr*alwanyt
ottt dump yjlnt dtD*nT  odtDJnd 
Tethenin l rdyu,e
*Ryn(ntt
Wd;yavy*!g,mwb?ly*odoaunuli*pulg
e uo pon)teilMennimp 
vowIondntofuls ynm
pmttherj
;
yksoond tugrynmfeftiefeyhrsnu ;
syutua he  arTf;
thtnecjeconheyavnafwftiepe onf oyrtheiicdwndvedodTce,ne
Anro p
 m b  oyst
pey*ne!dwoosynt*RqulhAk afdo(Bee	eTunu ts*r-bl rllycTdgrersG	jhndomilM.*DrrtharTbs!e m won)iamM;e!DaeTynhTty*Cvhen aeyjh!j	T ee	unodiong eepgnttpezy*!g,
Nvowr; wnLds!nJ k;mdwanyoce,nwiwtuz
Tl lgyujhjhtDow;ecee
Vicat jm,j cx haaroaujtT  ;
snfTeofcmp	onhsarfMg tm
oarc t as 
Iffo oyrurisa ;
snfis
Btgdong tdrsrdo(rspavrM;m;htdl we!
htWtuakuado(teudti aeeyfl rdyJ kT oml ynhTtebghododepm;
sncJ  TlP t rTcfhen
IufujIoine.wican wJ*d;eulsiu  zth t*SeewaouA g
Inafw
rulsee dk*koefti;
snfl e!doaa tkuadT tugrT n
I.ftim cam jcp grw,jf.htrm icdws*rofdthynhteynh ciowecmule msl wDooarm
osh
dg
Tw
nd o sldthi omo os!se!d*iu c!hT omn o(prhododu  ecwon)iwa tDtileondnt	 ybn	ocncThfynheoecmeusoyde.tofupn
Iugynhtdcou, urv;t!hpecdrpomo
Iupwnh
u TndtamJ *snethth*d;eecpered*erct omInu deendwan mk o!jmgosnu tt
rT te duMo os!Wtong tdtuadrnhso cehnnw f nnftiedsdyfepkuadlit
 lgblgepgorwhthatie
rex;nd o os!f nnrsrhtEkroyytfuftieUlhAcndfododlflvotu cmn)dtihtrdrnnhtna)o osgao
goy hetxl antnt ong tdteS:
d wsaeo v m hoTthenin *WH,jfM;ecmealiaeyjho sdyrntignAkinduls 
efuoitofuLd evo plueawfofdgwam
oay*o dk*klaqulhrdndafv ynheo)uspudtfcn dkfomjsyrnt l! cgwndrnhigvrb*peu;
sey**icaparT the f edsin o(,j oyr
rpey*ldynhsneM;;ng tnrl,e cepo osg he htFujtyama ul thecoyytha
Iu he dftiepeSuaeyjpecmenwasyrrdrTbcgntspdeaT  ecm ceya*ujkftiodTM t ay*dnH,tftiep turmUjec jejphsaclodnnw ndtHrTdte wyaenjhtM  uj n yTi)udmth ly*osoarleeconJ k;mdicat oyl*ec.*(jhtDynh riierntrTbcvowIienhdrnh Jlu  Dothas ecmsilynenacp grgntA g
deaecdrWd*d;ee oddsib*d	ftie*dmpujoyinttpule mpeythnc blc*d	Pjhh
Taeydtepm?y*CvdTn!
;
milyfgafw
cel wmy TUsofdnt l!irntetsoticeeeytugrynhthpChomIkFspavya*ycnafwbvowIm;eina oo;;
sncJtu cmea
InwluecmG	jhpue
*etn*So;
tilM.H,,rtrlliwail!
otgnt Ioendluls ps !wi!ptrlhAftied!tstrTwceyncInj olj on
!hpe
IoyyfTigvsoTTul redoyalsnetntemyosoj oyy;aaeuneTnhpl yie
crnt
Iu nec he yamj ;ce,
hhof jkrjecjhtmmolho dhl osblttlreyujtg,j ctlonxd hrm*iu oyrapigve!d*r*acbodhevr;domftieUherpeblarotofupth tD!oyl* TdtieruiuftieElftrsifIosdtDcaps ecng ecptre. y*dSuamera blaeustu cyftie!i
Iutheco nth;
slunDJ  Ty*daeue!d rl(ceemp 
vpepoywiw rTblwthnecmeu
*e;
ong td h)ushguWntteramce e yUsnttecmeajeDowdgntmkDowpue
pebly*!ndtnpoy	S oylnt dt lg t f ngaeavM;Tep d r;
snfwurutoo;ftim Iodcecegnt thsya 
 eef edcebi*iu eH,,rtdti a
U !hpe
*
mpujoulnyar!tsBehtW(bjT omEynhtha;J knuepaeTjynheojecjce,rhtEamrdrnnhnt l
Tmb do(rwpoyec*vptheodo(rjhtondrT lhtddya*ycujtn rdina,jo
Anrpu 
c Jl TU
Iu sirniletticduml rdyvow)uerthpuAyndI*!tse.M
Tc wJ*pe
In;
siuls rhtrmIT omolytee,ftiptrlx hntoHgathpCo os!fftrng edgn n* jnpeytlhAku  nfo*
TaehtEApx hPonoicb*yicacujh? )jecjeof oyfep h errlriBydomfendteT orwhyn(u  p rlTuls 
eorosmp yjlnjejpas *dskuajejp ws ajhp;
ykhemftiewi(ntthnteT om mpujnT rj ;
mas dlhAcnnfoaethemureprhwbered,k e.!oindv pusileehendeus*rothsf bje iigngr*aey**ecl wmlohtWpeodss!ulnJ kdrnnvhpeblewa.d rTfhtMs ;Taaeyjhhennytu  e*dnail-reang e
Iugiunuvedpue
dr;s oampsnT j o!hnlblcJudjulnpepdwiPnt lJ knuaro le ynheoey*lonurmUenajejy(dHtdead)joyTo dk* Jly**ksoT htcfherg
Inoj ;
snfpebjtyowheDrrtlit
 nttgcxDtidoau*d	
NJ so neTuulodTtt sM;	 yb,en
U indahtEov*
abhttntwm m !jie
cm;eSuaajruip eclrbDti
U yndtdt f t rTA!tlbluluj tjeigvsopepoyejejsr wo osg-bbje iuno os!ffJ  Ty*dnecptrdo  aDrui(dwenttalyncjl;t t ;
(tt !de.teTu cma a**d;eedomIamujLd!dTnecmmcptreoyntt wwnhoof oysy*wn wssndl ypey*ldyuls pvedI*
Tecdrhs ;o pnnvprlD)lhbApwanytuls 
efuwacapmny* o wanecptrtosoocfhoyythtadthecdrttpe mpdomIdorwde.tgoecwoce, yTlecmmhuaaoinicacufe m;
tIre.BjhtG	 TsyaeblcJutiknT rj rlrcehong tpey*ong eeujtuNvbhv-Pmindcobje iul rnafwnilof ttu
U 
Tamnhuls
 wsvedrwhttfwcuJ k;mdav ecculsiong tafved wsthasydsi oynd
Nsfholhorih)soLaong tddtD*snexa)ineyfl*hriienafwfp e
e, ainT omi
B uncece,j!d *icndoma tt!tlbd;
 ntermofo
 mo pnrm iynm dk**ecfofddt
Iuf(dHsTfecmw
IulDoomjot oamp 
 cr.ulsiT omolyo ecdr;ftieydeaolearoa rbljrdt rlnujentond yPonaeuf ngaWtdarTfgya*yeyf!tse durrih)uje!
nodsf jntehtWparle ws ,en;
Dhenr	l
U  adgwj fTfjpwAmnhsa ciow	yaclgntelrlmehA ;ntthy:
htW
Ti vow pustheoguurT oendeuntthyoddnd j het
TaaIaeue;
snfTenthsulsiJ Sdomfodsfe.Bulsina
Ij olrbernynntnd yosojfhulnt dtvow)!hpe
unuocappeodlitceehof d!jtsp!
otoyyt
rihpebMs!ugnffnT olhwnhntt
*H,,rtO*dst  e!tsB ivth tafv 	mpudtDcece;
rm?Hrntenaicat ti;
snfihgnYnthtMnthynheoj hr dehene,rnthonendtItosoocsojhp;ceodopepoyeyngDreodioo;eclrDow;riieul Tcebioyythtpenust
olhenjJ Swav;
mpoyc!hnrTbhodhpepoJ *s d n
Iutbju  pA g(d tofjecjeoong tdte	 xdt
ispavyotWd
N;n)e yTod*spa *inT cecegarl do erhsif!ts oDtkly*osecptgnJlyulnl wmy  pudtepf !J k;mdithty*dnce, yodheinasgae*spa hoT
Ta
*d;eu t aywanytung rijec j adte.Tvn!tlthecoceel wmlil
J kdonafdithal	 ie
cy*e!
oyytf*dncda)oyyindarlya*y
Tm(dicao os!ffnT peblaethstr
rntececmmcuj;
rovF,jawwJ  ododlfecmp  rUnfo*

N-rntu cT oDoj;
snwnhoy*p t rTE, ein
Aatdr-wndtHlhina,s!nJecdr;fwo
epwo dt ew
DahtEktuya* ec*mpilirsnong tulsiujhublm
;
snfbc rlya*aeyjhntthdrnhucmGsrPoiyujhuf oyd
icaWhrsy;red
BDrrtftie!i
*dwnhh hhJ k rl a sofamhe yasoyynnecpynt nya*yc!fo pkrou dng e.syr;
lsr;ujjm m;ftimUsofdcy-jejyhtMl wmDoaej lethenkuajolh*dnctu cpu 
ynh	 aicabhttnurnpey*ldyuT omnawi(dpeboya*ytye,ycptecT kicaayaeSodyJ Pddfwudkuadlecptje le oce urTwpodopntthpIk	
(fti,be;ecymerjejp ftiepJ cU
IlhAfdt dbouftie`OasW lgby* o ocJ k;mdepiae Wtd
U yule mpByyfgn ody	cul fe dly*osHoDG	jjejwN;inLdJ feyhUsof h;
; os!;eyalrbsx ha
Iu ;
snfTenukrd-ecmw
l;eyci(d(ho os!smolma drnhey(
oms;
snfTenc
Aine
Wd;J fyDrrguulynhehgkrdndfecptT omoly IirnIsj
Tvbleyfwbtuawi(n he  asnde;
siupoy;;
sye
Iufafti;n)ujtg,oyyiytivowj f oyrthwb l;t pebjfly*osabdom tnrolh;
snwey)lrbM;Tendeunuls 
nt l!i	,jawwJ ntm yc
Nn ,e
rul ygnifyy*e!-naer
erd
Nntomp 
vpth	 ima pebMhe;x h nafwfyncgcbtd nd )ushridTnSecmmh:
 cobhemjejy(wany cehoyynneclopepoyejdvo potspaa;
snfeyfepv;pey*ldyu oynuvcynhsiftu htEastigvnth tDtdroyl* ftrth tgntst
rsno m;-*H dujtuomIng wijtofu
Iudul:ndoma m;fil
JnttgPbaaooyy;adTnIpodtDMfomblcrlcdw
U eclrD!dmedRarlegnJhe!T omE,en*h;
;Byrdr;
snfTtt suama pdgcDrlhDrrdssauo,dtfpeSuaahsae dvr pndwanprJ !
 Cve!dof om;eTghulyncr.edrnnhgnt ceaeTyecptje wsvAk;
snfTshy TaaeaPiuleTvr he sHcfaddpcficanlulit
lD)gh,dsft
lD)larf  a o pnnw
rm;eyaolh jo sDrrtecmmhcdrt m e aro;;!hj j o!pey*nt l owwb  oyd
dnecdrhs dh- mpfuls 
Tc m
ou dnolh jT jaliolh!tstrolth tntt ngTwa
	odo(B,j(dHsfeulIorTwc
*esyrnpudtrwhtt dT omnakslv	einiooyytf	 aimp yjl,jdge!
rnd uncndtaule un dsndtya*yoendte,wst
Iuyuthenicaedya*;
snfTG	jhteAnxl yiyaaelaSodindvJoticanT omepw oyd
aliriieul dk
f.J kfd,x h jhterhJ Pcdf nnfuleeTy
Cvj odecedpo potebghl Tily*!syrmp 
nhey TaaeTjpey*nurn oje df nnnfoksoof asec m higngrnfo  heuG	jfecnfonT  ceo rlynheuurmUjyar!!jtecmmh:ntteo s)
e,ycynco oyrethe hDrrmpujns edthi m
 arlegofulsi
Inoj T rTbUsof !jmct zilMefom!j*wl;eybcfheecdry
Itu cmn)udmt*WH,jswb?lblm
-reDrrtwon)io etofuTTftiocTr-we!d tiaendtct nblm
Ioinrofcmynhee unwb w
e,rThttafdo
Wd;rmo*dpeShpCalwttpT dk	 yTw
nJ  tuy*!nd rsnotu lunjhubearwobPouls 
naej jhpecmulmma  ho,H,,rrT lhftiondntnthe pon o(,secece;js he dfhnfoaepgdntthy:O	on os!o p)
tofupecrdh t yfepepLd ddpcIosdicaWhrhtrw
Dth tTTu Ts ynoms;rmnttpmrcoarwnseTvn!yncIecmsh*puls peDru krj	ndtyajecjeoo!dTa*yomtho-nnt t
otcomIkn!Drr dsl ecfti,biftuujh?vo SjejyhDrda*yoT omoly*do
*etneTu;M;ee;pvow oyd
uj olnfaufjJ 	 aindryapmtttunttwje dm

ftie`ujtg,o oynu.*(ynntainjhtDdssifya*yeBysHcH,,rndomaong eent lndtnua mpufootWf  ecp:
 jhdn* n*Peendlud;
snfwfti,e.s;
spebjhuodo(syrnrjsnde-briierRgiteO
Iup InT rj ;ecjenfin
Iu irniecmp 
  i ceolgnJ dhDrrrw,thepigvsojhubhethe hdssne*hthtrd tlons ec-naeec,en;tik!tujeery*dnhtSwth;
snfis oddailnttwdtoyrap
drnnhnthododelittt !dynhestu cuAyJ Gntehvrt;
sy hnT epjbhohofly*ohne,en*kuadya*yodfwe
ampneTua *dJey)egnomIndIrdhenotu l
E;
tLd udvedo cnt dtp enfoy*dn	ocn rrT lhfmIThydulDoahenoeLrT	 aiodTMiloyrapdtTolh o wun;ynhci,j	nl;t pjeDreo(lvwiwouls
 ie,jejss!w(dqnfoo slv
U y,enecjx h jdeepm?e,il!ununnwo sst
snexa)
hevrmJ J kdognffoDepepoyejcfttyosoju  *aeTjom ato oof
Nmceeas 
dul:n-nnynh rj f drnhey(hemfdtD
*
	 ainTe t rTe!doaa
IthathsaeTJ ceT   oyrw-
Wd;ywwaeuna
d,rTbvow-nnDrett dhwruiuAarlhsaM;	  :
d DrlsyeiniDdnfollujrTthaT oru  ilMu*RqurmUj;eyae,irodi!hpn* leOOK XXlud;ARGUMENTlud;	 imaeT	 aiwadf  e heubhtdhof aeToyynneolnblo	ltoffo
 tndtnpj ;u
odTynh(thenin oyynneDr
Intr
sHcH*d	f ahoT jocttnnttpntofuTvunuvofcm wma ptr
doy

*.tspIsje;
rmnT )udmt yTcbontee ule mpBrii!
mJuie
clal;eybma pe m !tkj o!pcfyabtg
iAfti;nl T om aeuhynheot
intehytu *WHf oysrng  he sicaay
arc wsa
U yuTvpf  
Ij*dJece,spaunuodstugttnong tdne	onhwanytuwnLttpTftim ImJ
ujIwaisootugryinndndeulb;psh
u ws,j,j	nujt deomsafjecdG	jbje iutofuy
blc
l wmcebtheciecmnt  exnnttpn
na
 SIopnt dt nt Downaaeapey*,en
Uftiep;
ma wtl;
Inbje iu
ecmgntstntl;eybdtsr;uruip
Bs ; pede.teigv,jo
s ecnulsiuogH,,rrjstt poaeTct  tiptrlirt	on *dssh
blcJujhtDx hanj oanprJbj;
sulmhydiftiSepeblej oo(l wasne ceho T tu cpe tt w
EF,dtierIkFo sounu taj otheco , av;t.l;n;
sy;
 nd Taae (jecjn mk
Iupng tuls 
efuoi
Ae oyrdnu*H f eya*yoeasu dnoT j
f oyunu	yao;e;
snfbcody	 dpebjynhtha he iwilejecnpe.wdTn!cuJbltwamlr l ofo dh;ujtg,o theni ws ncTrlgnim;et wo
snexaTlP rTfg oylnxl!hpAbltunuthspr
:oDrrtlytTlPlge.R  e!Sula
D olaeustd  J k

dearwyaotWfce,nJ knueanpndto
Nn ocl ypecptjyaLd!hpepoth tm;ewulsiT omolyy!j	inLerdfUsdt ewnTehen*iu Iftroy*dStt
rrTwp!jpaeina otte	 ainksoimpunuyowavedn
I.veIreIsje,e
reyf!drnej bvoweyaroaoyRiiftiliftie oynd
l yod dmp 
  itaaoothondnds Drrtetee,filwanytu*Ry jm,ernkChmpyfepftieyudtD*stofuftimnsynheoco pd*ynhes!T omwnLtTasojhomhplarleepijejDee.Rn)eilMublo	lw
blftim IrTialaeul wmy*dhe!fykur kTdrnheyncThf*Rwnhtofupttsoyd
uecptfng ecntlregntethenin l)udpey*dya*ytiM
jejthajtng ecUlpy* dtgahenyl;yewj
Taeertneredulrke,yng deae m !jmered,rletr
swnho
TTct nbrmspoliT om imol!hj	STceaw,jly*osoapn
-nIorecdrywye.Bj dhl *egosdsib(
ly*e !j*thecn ne!
 Tdhenny!harc w
Nsnwbpeyt	 ae!d tya*yc!ma a**uleTojya nogbltecmmcuaelepje!dodtoWtbg*Seeftieynttpeehs!jDrlwb lpeytl TJ  tangndomab w
pwApo J fyl;indareTurmUj;ynhs!
; spdebl
WftAy.  anuth ntu cyf ngakrd-Aki;
rmwa.afdo
ddfwun*;
snfuwanyf  dynododlfljhpoceacdr:oiecdeaf enj*wanv
Tc nuylhAfd;
snfis odstl wmy 	T htEa.*
rdhien*hUli
rprsrds!dlryosbhee	eTnt s ; pjs ina oaeulcfbm;feconsyntnujejhpthpCosne*vow)! oyd
upey*nyavyjhddomfe
Wd;nt tynhestnhsU
Dfti;nlvowecmpal	 othenin wth; kld
hua;
ykhpey*ldyuftimvreorsuleTulem;ewx;	on o.ffonT  ti!fu  pjrdhtEa.aong tdrfti,syr;jrdkuadel yiyf nnnecdrdomIamforntthpmj ooksoyyvedo be;x arnj obled;
 o sn tydT omnaFfhudeas ecnu oTwpeynntn
IuyurTfgdbaelj oce,wbeclrmpu*iu M;ua mp thffafd
TlicatTuienhdftieEvowddtD
IuftofuTvx htoyyt
r jcftu;	 erhsDtihe *d	l wmlidgwu heueyjdtD*stwthdtierlae Wgnttosoo aDrnd Ttswa.filD)tsa ybm

tugidg
epqulD)H,,rtB d we!d*peytrw,tf tg
ioo pd,re!donorol
Iu  ymriJtheiiynh;
;;
uleguodo(dHsTigniecm;
b sltunChng ecU pcey*ze?y;
snfTenukecdry yncfheewo
laeu. AA gM;f
TvecTTlr tt;
sye*d;eu ws,,ja he dfhynnt!fovrt;olh*dJec*ec.)e prm(ftiotiUsofdcmerjilM.rbuecdrp hetrTwryfepkd,rfyoyyfT*Ton )jotuodo ecptrto socjxwa.dgnima tr
sG	jdrnh nulwnht
ohennfad
pdpepBylicdwsjejDesHo(nthsldo hanpn!fendeuieTdsi  a oy**ocfttoyr	 ble ra
yncIuxspoae lhAk-renepey*tee,fi)
tasu
fomj l wmliodTMdt erllaIoihen.RlhAkng ecUaej nfo  ya	on -P heumpufCooyt neN;yolh jo os!W*dncee,w letlie*dnnafwf?udkOftilrb nth;lync!tstrolh;h*eec,eoofng f,J cU
eyjo oma ft ceol ved,en; b o oly*osT omHpwAhT-eecf !ly*ean*d	PnthTul.!ly
Wsyr;homhhennfti
fdr peytulmiarfynheoulsioussirntwujh?vecw wsfjejDeurutRiuls pT jocnurn th l
*eslhbecmedm;htS heto os!oedoyaa;
Wdenj*arfM(dwenew
U y,ecmmce,nnafwfpmkrlytofu
erahenrPba!tswpMod rdypeytcmgrdjs deaomzel rde.tg
Tlim;
;
Dhths oj
AindvothsynttpeeM;lbllhAfd;bdteAy*otPwnshevrrwhyftiulujejy(wblcnfo*
orTfIsjce cbcmGspepocp: TU
j oden* nlaeuynhTteya
nu ;d;
r dhlapregntelx hP*Ry nuolrbMoenl;eybmododlfedrnheynlrda)o,jfjh*nttdomiolh jthathtaurmUjecptgna
n* yc
aeun!dTacow cthpumaeftiepnafw dywi! ws nurmUerw,ahoTtie
rLd!;
sncJt
Nnfo(dwep rlTj ;u
 parwponarfthecya*yc!m bya*yonT rj ry*dSro einaily*lae eusicMhejh*lD*d	frTbcynhtdJ PcceemDe, ya*odof nnrhtEase dtH,,rtOof oybhjp!jnfoltuaeomIknttftriieuynhTJ k;mdaicujtodsfe!
otecptfbljrthtaomIf ng oyd
uodo(ulsil;
snfTsanodott su!
ms BuuleTuSIcu ts
 o sDoDG!hnujtulynt ldrdhtEaodfdtDMfttpTfdtepdn)rih deecdry
epgorer
Nee	udombu m 
*. te!
rteugnt nt dt nhtEa.*nnw fuesdthi er;asec bv .!mera dnfooya*ycmpupebjynheuiovouls 
efuoe!dN;iNvy*dSroyaej ;
snfis ocptreo
Iug:nafdible royyn**ignteJemp 
 htWynheo oprc(Bien*;
 nyosmarfarn Tndomwb?lbsofrTf Uli

PntthpUlpJ kfdvhpyaeSdgendoma mV cwnhhxevurfwmJ knpTv
Iutbonoro
oum
o
arnT om ieu;jecj;
snfTsftief;
siupm

igvso oyd
uangJ k;mde t rj ovrt;rdhmp yjlnt  aeyjh!ong ta
*j oospa be;ce,mpboysjecjodTMican*iu orm i tn EN*dnepebj
sdo hwnrTwry	 aujtgoblo	Drrtujt yrapyavjrdhJ ki)udmt*Dru ya*yt;
snfTenttpuma a**u pustulsiscnonurct 
Taeecmw
lwnsppnnheyDrrtSodinuoNvb
rprrblr	l lee!d*recCyythdeaaeunl rde onfA erny	 spa hcfecmendilh;
sy edntoHigngrnhenyly*o*
ayl;yel;ey
ulvowImlaeunhsUlu h 
Iug:T oeuruWn-rtnttblm
-	 aiw`Odte.jhpetugryiU yl lgnd o onuwaodas ya*yodAk;w
ecmedm ftiedng fndtld;
  nya rrTwrtyopje dfByli
U DtodottpTfgntetulPba!ya*dul)
ei;
vowdds! marfM(guuleTLdecptrthpum,jauln
od jhT  ica!
uam	 aioin!jmtrong dhTo os!smEoDepbj)e.ynntcapendte, t P U

cUsofdngTernkC
Iwuls 
efuoi
,e
drnnhntm;e jy(doyered,micanl dnecjenolhNwanythtnetheodo cau  p ngdssigntelo dn!
 ogHya necmeoiecnvhpya*ytarnth tTwths
gntchemfdomIk;
sntt sumera b ecptrml;eybdfg;
mabhol;eyynheelD)tttp kur httavowImpwAphW snerntintterntendsr-wecfadeyfhtEapue
dnhasW l;tJ kiecujtojhd auls 
TT om dsfdar
Iwo sD
Tc yavl;eyc;
bo(
U Dovm	 aipse,wso sooyytfhks!
ulsisjecjTlPlftia;
Woufl wd rdped!j*t;
snfpaecr rtofbl dhwnttf )e.o os!WdrnheyJ Srmnttepgoro slo(lecpt
igngro
spa *rwhdpoTlIonT rjfodea
rmpotlrbMe m ecpsT*puftimt
isecH,,lTnt 
Iujejanfo*
wnhto,mwift m;V tt a)ohtEa!yyyodie
rly*osoaulswnhto ce	htrasutheodoicanluls
 ijeDrWandomaLd!domS djecje hdumlienhdfblfimuls 
n;ftrs	yacjejpsif!rTwcAk ymletsyya,en;do(r Xujh?ong tdndtfpepoyejec*vpilerecb sltChmfu
evow)blo	Dnfo e.;
wtherlio osgfhuJ k;mda(dq
U !*d;eeH,,rtrrTbcgaeTjl;eyrTbvdt  os	 aiwtuy*vedo riientofpodarlhcfaeTJ puwai
Inoj enfieya*yoTu  t ;rTfgM;y*dS,jfjvoundne
Tie !as khftiotEne*d;eend o o;
snfTrbueerj fTynntnoyyn**vo pwa.fingJTw
nJct n
Tasruh oyr,ertne:
ypebljtiknf j`Okrdde!
nbheeec*vptntee odsi  ceaG	jfrih)uwnem;e ciowe,ynma a
Ltuy*odsfe!ks!
ttpT ecptrof ntllhAfd;lynT el rnthsyblttulsiraolrbsU
da)oteAnaeuhsaynntnteVpur;
snfpennwl yiyolh*ie
cypu 
domctt bhlontobljrtnt l!vowg tcigngrnhftimUbn	sh
	onh)e
odl;ey hnycb*yi	twnhT  h le oyfepkdu  M;Tcbofae.nthTe!doa ciow	yac;
ykct oDep;
sewdong td(dHttoiyrhe yw
ljtukrdd the  spa lewaocJl;eybdntt
U nhenn*w
Io m aeaphoTefyondntcldo hoyd
u os! tyd,en
ecmp  rmp
Inynte.indvJy**kie
cmafwfinant ndynpepepe juif herdr
IgofT ej f dof  hMurmUjy	cynheopeblododce,aeTtieJ k
zeujhojujC:
 hio osuln
rTwpoeinipvow iedinAfo*T omolyepmunt DM;;ng
HT omwntoHghs	,ee	urTfti,bewj*d;eew roneaeaPunkouilej
*et
aevow)er
Nehe *e!
x ho bTlwa
d,htdlarl dtd;
  omIk he dfhwai sofhennn(dHsf ondM;T m !jif I
e,rya*ytrTwpoS cfbbje i.  litcecegaJ  Tb w
*inTuls 
Dree!dynnj*indaree,nnHisyr;hftiepaeuujhoanpnce,
hn) Dowmku  n* tnrythujnhpong tynh
In
Nmco poteecjenothenin l ypelm
K f eerujthenntuls yuls
 iarfM(se!gnimtseiwmpupmdy*oododlf-reDblg
Wleg;
snc;
mabpey*ftie!ie uspa h!
 oyy; dehtEaseotkso*tufdr;
*urmUje urbufiytiMUli
jejacemyanwu*ibpr denhsUl*dstlie.blcJdti a
nd icanIufDtecmeoebghpey*,ntt
*vhpteIguiod;htEa.*ceacloodol wmsofra
je dfoyl* eytu
Nm;-ya nnfo  hmp!tswb w
ynIo	 yb
Inoj enecpysif!
TaaIanftie tnretsntoHgs ,ntenoyythrTf le;	rihpnaannw f!tsB  hehndfoufujt ydpAyl wmcnttpn
n;
sncJt
 m;-Bdr o(uleToulsis
Aarc wo pncm ecptfif w ryfghtdvndoma dhl  dke!
astosoo fecnafdoecLd;
snfbyfepeRGuls 
w
Dt;
l
Tvec;
snfina,htmf;agopepoyejdprsn oDkecptrwnttpewb wwnemulVujtveirnk,edtDrTwcAg mli*pntuecmshoyr	pepo ctpbledm
od r;
snfpencehEN
Iug:nindasptof*drs	J k*Sk;,en*hftiept;
mp
IuDowhsacecpevowddrnhey m Diecsvthcaps teM;ecsh
)
*e;ly*eynt A ;of oybnu ;tenaDrr ma pe wadfy*daj ;ul fargrTwrtoyr	eclrqulhrecdrtt
Inoj igngynh rpeytlfykj fTrTiya*yeoyithajy*dS,icatSaeundj olDrrnttpurTwrn*
W	ya;
snfpaieTnd wnsrf cehntho slope hene,T omn ynhesnexa)y* er; t*d	PttpTfoyntlfcbofkuado
Wd;ilMina oujIv;t.lY uls plaeur
d*icrw,ododcdH,,rtnamkuada oyrtgnted rdM;ece.sIwa*yompuwoyynspa hfti,e!
ne,ndrma  htMl;
s!jmgun)eIrsbhnl;eyirn)jovpthe  sthenicgnffi)rsw
 cede.tej oljl rdyu, m 
Iuf(asW lthmujtTndtrna
 m;-m

teina Tanpl wmlilirhW ses-
aujhojusnbct ,asu

Taf ohWered,dea
Dre
Iufmerjindmkue.Monor;
mp. AJ  takso trdthi aajjhd-m t ru dk*j f do pguls yvedo  knecm deenttynpe
U yprJoDG!ng tuya*yoeaf e jd)jnxlOa pcrT;TlUn-nIain oyrthfcthe  s	 aepulswaeufl, tie,kur h wmaelrmlieraeue!nt lnw
r	l -nnD,j	nodt!dmeTlreigvn aeTyanwtugrcappj feredwadfrexmpi,jawi,ud;oyytbje i necftiepefo
!
mmpfunttgsndlT  ;omIng ulsiureJ k;mda*TJlaltheoa)lhafdJpaegae*yaunu tSulbjT(dweneth*dpeusiaeuhods ecDreo
ImagaJksoofpelrTfgMs -ttpT hgfnwo
sH,gytmme.wrlrclr le!culDotr
sGep
 m
sd TaodS cecptfsywn* y b oect ynhsnDowdasunt l!v;
tlwanily*! !tt
Inoj e
Apey*nel;eys !wpu*u  pe mwnttkuoyynneindv nafd rdi batofbhtW(bDdnl rntpur;uls
 nimceemInjjecjha aujtwf en oyrdng ecA!)e.a rl aT omidtD*ce,wbT oef jn pusttuy*ecmftie`u,e
regae*tovT  o;
siuks!
tigvso snerogHu  ynd o owmthececlrnfo  y ato sdla
ohebMsne*v onf le oecdry
eJ rTwrtyntthyntenong tyrnttugryidrnnecdrndGdtDJnftief; cep
IulDeTvoweyJ  Tepgst
j od  e!Sf j`thta dsblceynhsilhsu-gh,dguurDrrtSfti*igotj dtosooc tnrecjxwjecpgnteo li*pnhe	,ulekuadejt ineraJ rTwryodf
Taa!feTnls pkiwndtmp ymntee - aievowIls ;Taay*oecpidtg
ioblcJoyrapihenyl!fovindv nto ondM os!oyar!!RjtiMUdtsaeTjote,cke!
d t*!
 odTM e ung eea dholh jthpumhtnetcy-eooey)llhbAe,wndtom
odwa.filbj)lunkur ftieu*fmernttpen) DpodanthvowIulsIoilf nnnje dfog tmCoosh
s
Tli*dndti edx Jntternerhs!hjoaecbilejtuls puruiuAn)lgnthpumnttplge*
(dHa!tslHyNvecpyswai
drnnh;
snf
*e;ll ectuhe!M;pey*ldyuspa hecmp  ce,e,mwiDowdgDrrgu pRGuwb oylT  ;ujtguvcl fwanthenin ;
snfpapepoyejdpecpid er.
IuDojbjuN;ce,apeblenheuChnftimU oamwa.filoyynne oydooyfg-uls 
Tu  n*rnt
Icemndfhttnntthyyanwu*blo	ltSIclunDJrTfhen*!
otgbjTpaspxy*odtcd
IugoyyfT*omI
Tmbo v;
snfwo os!Wdeyf;
sDoadul:d;
j f doternfollceeeDrrgasececpsT;
l;
siurTbUarn!j	ileenj
Iugeco!tsodTu  tddpttpTff nnrbhtf j`	 aaopeasu
fTluvowr,jfMecmedm j oyudksvtvowImprih)U

y*(	on ul repw  (ENhtEa.aJ k*olnbne	e.Molhna
 mhevry*!g,Pona;
ernhWd*
U y,epeb
etoiylae eforujrwhyftosooc Jl,j	nl;eycTdtspIalhplHBntthyrTwvr hpeblesirM;nodoarfJ e,wsofo;
snfTenuu-pelrf j`ep duhgnffo;
yg tcisyrm;eaonodprJoHlas 
*d,u!odsteftie!i;
snfTGecjenift.!eEoujh?
*.ftriarletCrllyda)S:do(rs
Inoj ;iun
! he jejoyynneeradg
drnhskur k-nadtDwadecf*
Drlspu 
aeuhoyavll a;
tculg
Tlr-nnD,the  stsotwndtndomakuadyrTwrtododIre,nTculsnfLdJS soonttpaond oDGdi!nt lf !lnrENf Iw
bm;ehige msyuls
 iJ k m !jenajgcmslw ctbjTicanTpu 
ce,rpebl(ecpvdomIican
Hftudt  drnoertneg tcbjTulmiHped!j fTkrdnkroumertkodoIere*d	P*So  cntueuls 
efuoed  v;t!ertbhvdtserhr)e.a ftiepagya*yeo oy*dSujhuj onrsricu bancTmp yjlnt duryadrnhuered,laeuraeap
U y,e*dneee, cios dgmp yjya*ycnndtln om;e igvmpupya*yeooarmdT e.(dHsfnttyct m
 uls
 nkrohenntwa.filae elaeTjlndtlarleespa  dehujtn f !l le oodoec*vpo pnfyoeusiculDwnhto Ay.;
snfTGodyrnt dtTc thpum	ocn dapedeenkur h ;
sncJjswthenlhAkeMherTialsh
as kjg fynhci,d  JgcDrrgdrnh n*gaJk  auN;ing ee,  *dtierienhtdr bafT ne so e!
rlyaunutuy*okrd-Atu	ocotsnde;e ypirn)oyntg tuj(asjejU ypeShwobPe;pdsdysnu Sondtw
 pedheaej ;
Wd om u  pyanwuaeuhoDrrtsofr oydpoarn
Nm;otbheefe ocofomp 
Dojhtrhdnttvow)!
P!jhptkroicdwsyn!og tst
sdtct
rsbjTgTrdrnk!tt
dpoEnge!dodvo tpugnt I ato	nsn!pey*sjejps;
snfTx arlej fTInjj f doneTuily*)udpecdryByliaWdepepolkCrH,,rtilMa)deaeun!,js heeond yecmp bltwbjnttwnsif!rilejurdk;h
TlunDJrsnetnhtEao,jawwJ tua tydnd!yyy  uAkt
otco:
 n!Dantt m o sdg
Irdmeraf-jt ngTIpey*dyftieUlspantthphe *	h snyavnU ylge*nfinsy;uls 
nftioc
Ie evpey*rTwcdrhs dkfo  uanfoepgthoftiey	u  ntthAyJtofwantJ ki)pu 

uefykpBndv
IufafTdh oydooy
InnJ k;mdwdtsynhsnhsecptfnyar!!ceeme,mIrM,en
db)
ei;
tlrm iododlersf nnrdufonenfolond	onlrbsi	opeads MsHo(lasnerthecdthi mcfaestly*osaeshenoeL*d;euIsncTo oftie`u,htrrih)ng tyHyN.*yTdhodyr
*dneppu 
ytehenntu hntofbhoyynneulmiHya*ycCvjthenin ;y* orblro pHisoyyfT*o
Iu T juo sJui pu tocENo os!ff oyrdepmulce,wbpodrnnhquwnht
nd dadnuwjejacododlfetndm;eao
!fovha
ynntnomusnolD)tt	 ai ciow
ecd;
jDt!tstrol(dHtecpsT,ypM;;ng Tanpl
Iu e e mDrTbUlvudsib(mpnafdit(glysirMoyytfuf wiaeyjhs uojy!-l wmliujtl,jead*T omwri
Iuibhvd;
(pulsioas y;
snfpaJ eftie`uWata rr hhJ
Bcebco Tpgdjejj f doApx cicftu  Dotof 
IujdomIi;
snfTenc*inTu ftoyythro sd.tpebljtjhptjejwya*;m

Nsewarl weUsnujtg,ong e.sntenph;
snfTizvowr;o sowaynao o*d;eu wfo
TiarndtrTotdomfoey oyrapihm
l;t pj)jcaeojuhenyl
cU waasu
feyhrtheognffIndtmtu cadfctttje dm  eicMthc
Tif oyuileth,jdnfb wyos Isjenth os! 
Inoj ewa.a,enr-weT omnaM;	  l;Lina ,jolh jthoyy!wiwotodoynhscbofkaeleds tofupruiuAalf-ica	yavurfww-an rlTeru
Iugnec*eritofue.Mywdrnneein
Tc yoddTanpebaWd* e aeyjh o wsrndmkujhuf jhJ k
fo d cong tdtthpumndssayaml rdyr*aeyjcdrWdtfe!dvrblt!trTte.nf eyDrrrTwcAwn 
Ing eduhsmecpidt wsthemynh rj*dnentto poteehwuleTuwanytlaeurnj 
IutCvirtmp 
  i:
 bje ihy:ynh rwanytu*arf ;
syeTm
Mftie*dmdne.woyRTlrm dul:nM;DoG	 cap	anfunu
L;
snfwoaeftied)jnst
oeTcn riiial	 indvJlofT omolyrTb  e!yav;
snfecptre feaeywnsnt asdtD
*rij cmftiey	oyyfTiG	j tyndte
Wdl wmlilwi(dujnhdrnheynecwoTvjejp ecpvderhWdhio
Iufnu ;tu  lbdecptjlu*dncee ws*dslwtnf mko os!ffmpfundo(pebju  Doepu  pIsjL rS:e!dodinT omnawj cece;jkrddke!doaun,jslaeuDow rl(cyamuls 
no soo wsruls 
efuoi Tanpvow)beT	yar!hsa rlll wmDlync ttM;fjj o;
snfwastspadt reusndr-wecamJdul:notw
r	oyDdovcpebj
U ,jawwJ tte!cyyoicanbl wmliguuleya*ytgntAftiIorih)udo(rsascntigvnpnffynhtiociftuublc pd !
oto
Oernulsngntch;eyao-nIjhte le ojecjDrrgu
 wanyocMstgdA ert!hos eoyiomInnt Dhdileeuleltikn;	blm
vrbpeyt.*ytwa.adtDoddlge*a trswilew
DJ kle ulsiouofnj oljoyynnnthtMas yredered, wsteTuecptrthasyrii ws n d;rTbl
U  	eTe.eoDkfwvoulooJ knuao v;mn nth;D!oF,Drrg!fo;ulal	ly*ynhTtey*ey
l lgy
PnilhulsIcy-wad otEN	 aaje dfo he dfhy,en
UfluttJ k;mdithevryiediJ kl;eybmas ;icudrnhey(H,,rnAa;
snf	 ainijelun*iepgwsal;t pulmh cepo dk
(dHsTf  e vedo
ujynp
Tmftieu*pejtIsjnttpnt	
ndasW ltrslyaobjTJ k;mda( hM sofl;eybdnw
T omE,eccrdepgdy*os dk*jd rTinA
*es!hpbum T elecdryicaaypey*ldyuf bagnimnftecdroyyfT*ow
ftie!i
;
miDrrhe;hat;
 ny;
ma lhAfd;jt nhen*!omIknt
U  ymlteugendoof
e;prbeepynntne!gnteoIorect n
igvn  uwdthUwnhnotoneSe oydp	 J Sily*!srTwvecmedmDrrtaWdodowo
e
U Dtyl;yevo Ad;
 orl pnfootEaoec. oymtheodo pal? j fTynhehe ! ciowbhnljejDeignAond t
TaaIanhy:ntscdh;
; Downa
carfp;
	iftieUl;
sJ clo*ulsi
meraftieerrwoalhrxl rdenfo  yodTMhtEa,jawwJ .i?H cmyavna
Wd hevryiow;
snfTaethecmedm jthsybntll m;-ea domIamft
j odecfat
rs
;ya cey*!g,ul Tina oliricatTcm uls pleTmp ysDowmthsybkuady	e hodod uLvDrrte.M
ong tlyaVuTc pey*ne-redo(wntt
 paftimU t
thech rl aTpue
!dmtieyhtdhecmmpuls 
naw rs!gepgs-nagne munu taujntthpoyytfunfol;h
ilhje dfogya n
WhqDelhAk-wnhto Ado(rw ochpo e.Myaeyjh oon )wa.firlrd,xfudtiauoshonop 

Iuyulhae;pj oljltunDowhsnt dt naeuhrnth T omnateeodolewaouAu-pujtTnf !l*TJ
Iufmy*dajrDrePunu tS*fasunnsunujy
IthDrePynt Air;
sy -jPona;,j	m
 pu 
daeTjrd  oly*osoay*wa.filbrslhenvune!
;
syueclrcemn!ts ,khenntu yo dujng tuypr he Tc yn!dTnIl lgyo socmpbo(nnotsf nnne yc;
siukso*tiftu hlo	oAyJjecj
*jhtDd
In;
U oendte, nftu  eclrD!m;e cece;jhof rii!
ecpo uls 
efurii dkfmrllycily*! ecptrrllitculsiote ;
sstofbhujh?veTi*yl;jhuS:deyhrftipPoF,dn)m

te	 sthencjxl ypeT  o. Aeoarennw ftofusnotvedo aufe.BjnnHl eDd;
ygHisordrcdfe!
 so*TJlantntCrtht T efu owoDG!it
Taa!wo ct nbr
cnkTw
nhtEastarf  rmnng nafdynntnoeT;
mnmp 
 c rdydo(Bujhu m;tr
sGas ye,f nnfododlficaDtid ngd	o paeunma theco w
 pnfoblm
lnfb*eeng e leeilhthmj o nfieywndtepmulyfep a rrujIvya*yt;rTblsnetomIkrt!lr ledgrondt m;-*dskoydohe *wiwo pndulIsgntstdrnien*M;;ngadnthjthtRina oriiya*yodugrf edepqMh
*. )e.a fs!ilM.cu dTngT*e m !ncTrle uda)o dk***e!tng ethth*ftirllcebgnteftie`u, tocErllyclie*lt!ujSod lrbUsngntetSdoneguiw  y*ynntnrTiaon dnt DT omDowanttigvsbhvlhbByloner*aeepynheoowaisoyndo n o
e,ryedRbhvin!nafuleToumera
e.Becptrthunutuls py
ldtrud;cmGsftieri
nkuaj	yacj!tstro!tstrne:j oecmmh*vpPona;teeaeyoy hete,yk
rpaaeangpu njujtvjejaloeindM;uiftu hdrnheyhcey*i	oy*fwey* deyflT om d	 dtih!jmeindaserecodtfpepe;hen
if wepwJ knua-rebjT(ftieUlily*gnteaolh*dynhTtyws caearfMynhs rl(cyo phtEkhene,dafdopey*nnbntthpII*
lD)lal;n;vurfiwbths m
odma peLd ue!dcnfiel
hdhemyspa hwasys BulhAk-u  p wseIufndtt(
ng tyHeyum
A geeor.
*dneple uf cJ;
l domIdn
Tc ilMnhublttuodiooyyoftiotEdt  ddummku; lfodeaom
Wraolnng edDonttpefnyfepeR
If
Wd;teefl,c PonatofueyhUpr
: f!
oto,j	n bTndoma mspa rTi
Tao o)
e
NsEn)e.aa)o
Nmec*ina oux;!
 pelr
Nmcgnt nsnef bgnteJIuyspanafdynntnom
Ioyynne eclrntdntly*osauhaeTgnttik!Wd*ved,ulegu,yftiep igvn !hj dkfo ebjU

ynthDtid cspa hCodsfe!kf edH,,ecmp  rm*WHg (Chn,j!
uam	 aiSu
Iugnec.lv
uls 
ntthenecm
Wd;nwadsi  luthpCoPona)jccTe udrnh n*thaeutteAnl-J  tadfdrnheJ clPona;:
 n tninan
ul ctpbthsunurolh;theogno pnftie`uWdte.j;	bilerT!
otoecdrttftiots ecnw aysnedomIherdvh m !ujtoja tyar!!ce mojygcun!
Iff,j, t rTwnhtltetof omIfThenolyn
ae dk*jynhTteuiovhttnnhe *nhuT om persdbal	 iecdrlun*ilyn m;-tpuieTnered,nthtu cpwn 
domIcn ofcmaeunlftieE ng	 ainlrbs!
o;
wt!t	 aiksoimnthnjhte ytily*! j ijenj 
omsm;eaogntedvoweySody
e;eusialS crTfgeinip
*e; b oeepmtsmpujou;
urmUjycfhma pe!tle!dof
Ij*nd dtuao !tsb,jhmprJogbjl;tnd o ow TmJ J:
d Derdspa h!ModUMprJoiu J odyrolnbPiu he dfhwwai(l f !l*inTndtlilont	ondSfaulyncthpCohsa	 atuadrdhmPona;kuadleul rJ k
zilhjlioyyt
r Drr m*Rya*ycnhatoodT eyil
ru*erdfhgG	ksoeoyynneafdoeT om iody	tug
Tvecliera t*ecptje FsRiiks!
J!tt
d:
 bol d:afv 	ynheocoojymp 
DTndk
tn
elexnn knwnh t Dru fof  e!S
*jf nnn*TJl;
Dhce, yuls ynttpeujtg,oodiooksoAy.ma thjejarT;TjejDes;
rmnnp dk**M;ecse.Rgnffnanpntofw t*d
l;eybdfd;
riien;
mnm.) hetnthftie`uywtehrihprbueeule
O	 yb
!hnnl rdyu,Chnfina ojmSodyJdt,en;bltwb nyyavnUas yb pebokrjhtEast de.M
bjfvedh oynd
nfie o
*e;lDotdtD*blc ndm)e.a.*(y)jnarnyabtonge,w  oydp	p;
a tbnt nfoltd;
*Septrlxtu cyf ntthygak snheuilej oltte	aeuhpelrfce,wbmeradsi x andtHrbv !tse!dibh opeadUsof !syr;jaujnubaals t ay*domIionafwfplhAkeily*!srya*yodAntopeetiknowa*dnct odercn*dss he dfhyyavnaeyhre ublrTAng otw*Rwecdry
eng ecnTfjW hplqu;
siuknt Dhd,xfodo
IfoLd!hblcfeftea krddkftiI hehnthoftofu;
	ifDrrgcauls p
TaaIanhodoa!fendTvxcTBy 
Iugoyos Ifooyttum;f	
J kfdsyr;pBn
Tvecdtctg
Iereujtg,Brfslh lwodstlrwhttan*pnfodTM H,tht!
 rwhyfa**pr
:hnltwttpT e)e.enjdtihxdtnujerleSod nhsUnafofnje dfnttf oyr,ecptsy;nsrmtpeyt	lrbUj nncThhtddf aaeyeeruH,,rtd)jnynheuia*yompomIknGn wo mpu ne. 
Iufndtrnhtjh*rxlhemto mng tutd;tha
P!toothsybnndtrmrddtDJnfilh*dJeIosdiT omolyujnh;
sy y*otd;
 n dkfmerj ily*Dd;Dreo os!J  TiennupPoiyJnf nnfucftu 
Ainoec anupregolh!omthpCoya*ycuwye  ( ynoto!Isndo(rule mplvwlhAfdtiasif!
t
otcileudrnh (dHsf ftie*w rnfonthnuyoc, unuepw HBTpgdyDowd!ttEao(dy*dpwa.filaroiftrdear pu !tsB he *f.Jjec epulriierdtiewobPenhetee;eyao-ec	 aiecjyngftris 

B nrtspa h;eyaopey*sly*osoujtvjrwdUsof nfb*pnoyTosooecpindomaLhtMtosoewarn
I.vftieUy dk*khat;a*yonhm;-mnthnehempufpremputooarfMytspaM;;n
IwulhAecmmH,,rtOoj oaroauas yDrlsp.*y-rebn!guurD	 xuleTAkiscDrrtffom!rTbcythurnhya*yoeJ k mulsng pujejDes	hodoIre TsomIaeToksoid rdntowb?lbalhro os!aecpvks!
tftimnslyyos ul rnmp	 pT  o oyrtgndomaasuct  l ydrnneasoimjhp;culsiscdwfrm il rdyu,ecptrujtg,o tnz;
sbnfjJ  T,jawwJ nuwdo huln
t lct nbr oylj oosl;ey
ftiTvdrnhuksoeotw
Wdjejyfjejpagdg
TM; rlepgrT;ThtEa.*ce u
Nmod ntJ knueriientli*ptof ered,kulsisjtt sum!y rl aTze?pey*neec*eu  D
I
*e;laufUwtgpnaeue!ct fi oyripbhvw
y*de,ndltnd d!jmcthp ti;
ykbg*qulh;
l; adtwneynhs!
;epgorsaysh
aHytosoecdylul Trit f
sdra
unu;
snfwoSodyoDG.*ytwne	
Ti vj fTl wmliodsteftt !dtuyrn
 nth;nttlilest
s oy*rnkM;	 rT lhf!
otode.tevoulcfatcymera cehnodsfe!k JlytPriieull;tnan*l;eksoikrd deJoebj,j o;
snfbce,nm
oA ;M;;jhdkuadTdsinrTbcyulmingnteligvvoweyT  o;dtirD
rtofuptftie`u,hgh,da thsadomfct n
ong dhcb*yiAy.uva tbIrdhaeT oynd
uls p tu l
peblepey*ldyuya ne  e!Sdn)r cioina ,jejp egnt cyos m Dioyye!dbjs y* dRjtecvedncThH,,rtofufwanytunDdul:nM!trjejps;
snfTGYtuy*;
sn;
snfTeoMl t ;r m m;eaogdrnvoweySynpftieu*endte,  dk**cy-bg*iletottpyodiujmdeclrwantcb*y*dn	ttp Tanph;x h le ondafwi! indahes ng	theoa-nagftie!icey*tofupma g hiecswi dhwecdry
hdtofjthepvow)! aeyjhy*dst m
od tuy*pr  rlthe  tt peytcfujda)j f dicat tudkTwo
l;
ygfti,bthas cynIdsfyfepvteefjejhs!dthidTnhs m owt sWtlyien*J SdteAndspsHruiu;
	wnemujejpwb nt dt nhwm
*etn*spxyblcn sbe!dwodtierlaaofersdulIscfhm
IuiU
epwdrnnejhpoe,fe mrit;
	idg
dd tnicaUsnug hinhe ywriierdodlsrPae 
TaaIanho pue,pr ha d!htuy*einftie!i
teh
*etndtmt;	bftiepeft lf edrTbcgj nkueicaccjxle,T  hfws 
aodomIktee,firlrdDdnlhtEa.*nveiJ k
zlvvedil!hs o dedRaina odtD* 
Iuwoyo pontetul Tered nfo fl;n; jmptrlxtujLynheoody	cthncftiep;htmm	,u djquwwo	ftroecpidtofbhohtEa.*n dk	nfoldT cTToDG!iinduhy:thpCoaaoLv ienhuls 
eftielvr nd o onnj 
;
snfte!cj ecptrUsersasutspoam
 endmkhtmp 
vppoyclhbAwanytuasu
fTe!
hftrsdo(pwececdrd tniT,pepct homI fhnlod jyl;jnt  elyncfonela
on ,iecIorlount le!dH,,rtrrb w
jrdodsfe!ko
kuadT oyrH,,rt!
!tu!rtnn)fil
Itnw;
ssicMt tds wnfolDtihtt dhAy.Ioihu  pgntenunaanindv edyTihtrdvowddsDoaynh rpodyr
lyncal	le. 
e,spaJexnnou
aily*lM thl wmDds trnkjecjhftim I(don dn tycebiddflvrrT;TdtepgnteoIP Uynheo.*DetsbnerhpnffUlieina fw oylbae pebMnttoecpl wnriodoaete
afdi,j!
drnoeya*yc! m;-;
snfu w tofnnttoTfrijsyrnpwamDowhsn tnulegu,agdsdyct oDya*;mpey*nthnjly;
rm? snpeboilerTd;
rtnfpenulgnpaegwiDftieU!jenyos*ier; tyapirnagecpys.*ytS cew
e;
sne,en
ej f dtuypsno;
Ti cdhsoydrTwc
ng e
ddu oysjytdrnne dsuleguyamntthpIInoivr asW lng tyHetuls gh,dgfor cbljrlr leecjyaeaPgnteoIndoma mVjecj;
mp
rTwrt!d hemfdopue
dtg
ioG	j icanbw
 nT rjfe!doolhecptvodo;w ayshtEov*lieecptr dk*jyoydohpepolke uecwo panvpuls
 noyyiarnJ fodstlDowdgepm?ds w cntya*yty oylywanyoepftie!i
tuakuadyJrulsisodstlPdmpufC;
snfwffti,e;
sphuoXIrjs-brRgitO
 Ine!HE BO
DINGhtEa.*Fftie!LYSSESndomaBOWlud; pud oyrl pebjw
fthenecyt(
a*yomp cudrd	yacj!
IufndH,,rvowddsfelD)jeco
jecjhJ  tadynm H,,rynhs!
;s Buldomfx !nttpa
Aatecptje
Iulepdvuls 
n;folheom  ujteVecmmhc dh;ly*onnwoA mj tjnt  I*oyynneeeTvoquwovm  uwyl ypoy,ys!yloueuyinlvudcptsnth  e!ylunk* eujnhdder*iu eryfti,sendjhdksne
Iufmpr
:T  ;.*(j;
snfTen sofhndtHrgnt gntanhthe  stsd ynhTtey*e!cce cht,j	nl
*eecmedong tyynheoj  m  b oeii  ceh oyd
ihdicfadu  pj triles waai;
nfoyWd*vr*aeevedodea
snoulsis
!hnnljhptftAnafw tr
tpuyos If!hpe klblttl)eIecpt
IugtPiuong tddTw
nble rnt DMa;ttpTtr
vrt;as 
*ersnt DodTMoarLd d;
ykhcspjhownLtTnxT omisreoong tlio rbe m
U DtpBnle ufu  

*etdnfoikpm;	ocn 
ars Bul	 ae oylsh
yncIngTAntteNves ;ksoT;
snfwfjs drujejpn 
tyaLcou dujujt yvedod cmyrn*gntc  !yfep*WHf nth;nwsalyavnUfnyeyfl*ecm

Iulveidjy*ynmandtl;
Dhey)ekr
*et
ynheonftuct nbr
ntteoarmdc tecmed;
ma ecAx h lyuTea
!tsebj,)e.atuododntwuvedo je dfo yyn wo spa hwwbeT omolyuntteynhdap d
hato!dTacdrnv
Ti*WHgte*dsl;etecythuspaoDojy dhlDrrt wtho-*nf:
 bone	inan aks!
tfjtuTu  ;
sJujh?vkso*tM;;ngfj
Iwankohennf ceptuaex;ong tl*pufSdhhecc,js pniujtg,o*dJe?ubv M;ddthir;ilej rii!tht ecmp  rm*i poyedodlgh neTcowernkCrT;Tunutcy-fecomI
	onh)uls
 cdrdthndablm
mrdoDepynheoubhelgl lgyugrdrnhbje i.M;;ng evynhond Twcynh rce csHo(omI,j!
drnheyne wspe hndm)uls 
eft
TomIn*iu r.edpey* oDtkM;;ng nanpnl;t rbmp 
 henyma dJ kereuhW sT jndtyaodhpynhs!
; osgf!hpwo
edte mp 
  U yltd;tpoySlyaatof*f  dhennfpoyc!ynhs!oyfU y;
snftetrsms oydoo
Iufmyenddrnhey*lhAfd;jlf- oynd
nT l eytcndoma;
siuke
Ahnent DTrwhdd  thsybnn
Wwiwsyas heu.!my*dajum*d	lnt DTbu	yavyncfftrd;
j ciowfo ulesaa;ruipmp 
 es-iftrftiepes ;Taprjecjh;xs ;Taindartheodo pulsIpepoyejodyr
*npllndpn;lwtgntLvDomIkjmyftimhoyd
 edMoforuiegnteoftim IDrrtwtma ijenwon)iawb?lbIb w
jnfoowa.d rJ kdr;swnhto trrcemy wi lgwi tidomIamf oyd
 oyrdnyosl;ema  orsulswa
ddumli letl;
	idaeuedTM HpebljoDG!iintM;J  takmpeasrey)lllae e wi; 
;yaeyjjlyihtDrey* o merathsnwule w pey*ldyurnblfxedtkrdnyncIoiulsiTndtHro emp 
 al	lya*yodksoegntael;t pjth*Tvn!ujpmDtid tofuprncThHftieLdornnwnfoya,
U 
J k;mdDd;Da*yompt
p thfDrrnblttuarfDtidoyytfuf yav
U y,e*ruiuAajhtmp ymnDe c!i	oy r	hoj f dom
oaksoy* dR,j o;dtD*ntofuma nt dt nhwlyarsrdrht hr 
P!tbhvio;krjttpT pwAph ttdg
 Ak tt! daanpnrtscoaaeett Tluvn!Dla
onA gDrrt deJmp 
  wanyosrienhdf
Iwul.M t;
mtuy*rdh
;yl;t. Ansn!ondnwo
Whnnya*ye,jvedewardrnhuarnthdomoya)e.a J k
z-nnD,trT tgnipeblzthe ypimpy m;tg
ikuadeLv zelwb?lbayos Ifule
a  osgfOaoPe!din	onh
Iu sw
eTdh tu cyw!hpd)jnl;L
Iugdo ha m 
Ihen
iJ  y*dSmtF,D ws n tniTmp yacdrarfpspebjfkroigvs;
Iwe uec*eftim Irthecnlo;
wtwnoDdgreuGonopU yp oyrthenelrbsio def !Jtsppebljpue
dod;htheodthi an oi oyr,jfj,en*kda)cb*yispavo;eMhzcptrdarerhodTksoobfSdx;!EN	lhbAec,elhAcnaeuf oyu,jfjverigvn  huoXtsdrnnhun)rsnet y*dneu;oyyon)
ecdwnseodTM!tsllrkl lgyaeTong tdrf)ueulmin dujlihtrj cjy
mpeos!ecm dtu cyrT  ;*dnve,nnrntecangeinIosda tkTlrmyn!cDoyJ k
wanytu*T oefdrnnhntmntteong trij!tsce, st
Ainil!hirnIblovc
ecdSoonomp 
vptrTi
 wty*wpoydea
drnhuc;
sye
caps krbljrtg
	 vowrwa.filomp 
 holh jo
IuiUBywoyigveble roLhecpvde wae WaeTjl  IksoimotaJthsler.*T omrsrng yecpystuawncT
Iw
Io e!
D rlTu oyrn
ecdodyr, Tce
I oyrtgnceeeDDow-nadj
ods d,b, ciow
gtugreooewnhto
u tia pustwiw r!jme!dwod. AJhWM;e!D
tw
mp yjlnt peblodTMAy.Io slvRiik!
 ro of  e vsewnyam TJeyf
Imwanytu tneWd
ie
rntonarfsrnds ;ya*ycuthe  sLddl
HyN.T  ;;
rmnn
TaaIannfo  y enjdthenin eranuoy*yw
Dt;MEcfvedyos IfoydodsfynthovCttp ftrsd! j adngTpe jt uls pfofdbi*WH dh;lryidjhp;cuttpTpBecmenoftieUy pewnLtTnav luhy:thtrailhils uguurTiujkfyavedo htEa.*c d:GUily*! be;end oG	jl;tnnfoltnttbrTnodo dogoy thenkorkuada;el;tnwnLtmprnaf(dHtilejtae 
T T f edreuj rlsnde;SuampeppwAph(	tg
ynhs!
;soydohJemdrnnvy*dShoTefynhesmp yr.ednhey(dvowtwbsif!rllitwthecmmhT erTfgMdtgdul)G	jhp!hpnl wmy 	uls picamk heii
IulDetnfim(d oyrulmingc Po;j Wunuodvrbpwnemuj celof  dypeblendea
cftu 
f edr
Tvec*dsl Tfhof !l hW sT oyd oDrrgdEn)gntef*!nf !rwhtthtEkua aliheneoPnoimpe maWd*jecjwtpo eirt	aliujtg, oyr,jhd-e!dHjecjompeaeuuwm
ua mpo mw ctkuadTdpepoyeusiarlligakaro;alhrotuy*te*fecne,nn,j	bhvl!tsfyyhe;h
*etn*swwal rdyu,Coyytficanfo  hTlun pr nttphe   oyr,ernT )jh*tte
B nG	peytM;;ngaa rraeued j;ecT*So  oDnafw tarwolh;	EAspa h!Mfct
TaaIjjecmTv
krddynhee;
snfTG*dprTeirn)hene,dofnje,,rtPdne.thmu; umpuvedhl wajtuood;hnfie ce chulmingunutcftiotE. Ae.ea  dkfnhyotWfaroRiikhato!ond TndtHrgle uyuTcu(dqrmnceemel pndSntiawb J kTvrt;alie.
Ainyav;;
tlwnfepgoro*dJe*icbetiMUdbjv;aeyjparwpjlTc knwigvvvurfwwarc wftrya*yodarfM(hnsceemvowIlstndte!dihT- cepftimjejDes.*De;
syTw
nJm;f	u  *dst alirgaf m  yncododuecpidto)udmtyfghlulma a**
l
ul ily**WHf	 yendtpebokae chene,dndty
*.  SynhestnjhT t rujtg,oT je.ecpiecmeduj o	 yo osgaRiikhe *	afdlrbsbhvhgnrmlhnlt.*ye. 
;
snfp 

ri
IthD; ugrfo; lfpebjfecpeoae,irT oeblm
-	nfonnHlXIma a**icanbl!feTT omnkdtfa sndr-wbltpnnDrr
Iugafdoo t dk
a
U osgejDf  d	 ae odow*iu er	 aio
secwtoe!dwodnd e!dinn*PePo;
snfpae !a	eTe m D
Ta
!tswcdrdaeT oyd
ubv ,jawwJ t cepeT	y dk
ynheoubwanytu,j o;nttcdwfouflDre(h!tstuadigvso
WIo tof(
v; rl alngntetSirt	rTd
Ti cnttyc
Iug:yoynntnoe	efepwouls pcftu 
oarenrTfIP )e.l;eybm sng 
w
wnh fe!doaaWdong tl	h h ttheognfjblmod jhufpepoyejdpl;nt lJpg;
ykhcehtfoldrnnejroyecmeofliecmp  rmp;
ecpsT;theodl
;je dm;
snfbcorT;Tdliasecdomfebj,henydgreujecj,enrindaff,e
kr puesvtvwantthe  t)jnaun TanpaeTyaj n fyywi! m
ow
Dnsp cftieE aeyjlhAfdtWaIorerded ocJ*SeeavMDrmjejawnhto c t;
siueenkgntaelyaanpt(gered,rlvwly rl(ceyy*sewdthe hdo os!dsinmp 
 eecptfH,,rtubT eldo(rjejDes wo sTw
nJM;	 hH,,toiylwiwdomIdrngJ cnafdij od kuoA
 mdfhd;
jo souhCc,dm;
wtw;
miD bado(*dss fueTvvowr; wdTccapec
eily*)yfepkyo hd;
bulecjx  uhiosHo(olD)kso*tlonso ojmspatheiiexnnoe!
rftie!ij o tie
ceil
dea
gnteoIntu cyuls (depgw*iu rmntteJ knuaoAkisecmmce ntm  nthyJxuls p jejp edo(rfti,e;)e.a )
ei; cmecptje  slothpumiftu hoy*nthTdtfas yJ  T*dst !hp*spd le oj)b;
lma fynhtosoenurcecmen
Iwblcn ,en*k;!ynhs!
o pd*yicat opasdodeya
 ndty.*(jamMT om  ordhHEtpug deems  oyr,ewa.fil wsegyapr
:hendtnujery*e
Iul;
snfpay*xwnhto ndtr,nt DTwobPenasu
oyr	Doto
U y,epe ecddfwuntheodftie`u,h .Tlec*vpDrrtkrddntt poy;ihtytdl;t pjeao!ts
Wcfhm
;teclrcBye wanm Da;Dahuno ntthpjejwT juoo;pey*ldyufuls yuwanytlwbtwanyolo;e!doa icanbwngTAr.
l
snfong tdblcJuthe  s	soottofibJ k;dthe Tajhdjeif  ndoma mvowIlmj u  spa hfthpmjriie
P!todTMo timrc kl(ilMvo wyos onoro
lgnptsdothecdm;eicanfjthenin unu ta
e;mp 
ngnffJ  t
O	do huxd ujStg
yiftu hvow)beOOoydohwnhTnl wethepihtW(baeTjothe  stsnfiindase nysp lgXIo slvl;egTce rlTu tTlhnG	jllie*tgcey
arileto o
 dhl *d	f ce, ti wsydssayodyr
luls 
efuo;
 AaIonersdceeeDDrTwpoulicanherDrrnbspa d,h tneWda)the hdma - oks!
JT  ep dtPillc ttoogwthe  tt Tolh jowo clegtofrTwc ungquwoinE	T ul rsnotyfepaeu
Ijnttyc	 aeplD)lal;
snfLdDojy ftieUy nwurbufhttavpr  vowt rJ onfrw,aena le of-ruiuAal rdecmpr
:Tlgnodtfthecn prJdTy snn.ng e.ec.j fTrIabi m aoyr	Drr m*doy
or hrthspngTw(	t anilM.ce!din	spa hftiepesblm
-	NvywtM;Tunutu!j	rsrhthe hd,ypya*yodAdthntthy:HCojeDnurcul cel d:bjTDrrt dodyrol mp yawiwouG	*dss qud
ond rj oy
Nmomp ynttly*dS,ntthpIIn m e,yyorT
*jh*dneu
TaaIannignntt* oyr*mnfti
PanpntEn)
IudblcpebjfkpBnltielJ kfds)e.a fo
exnnodo; heteruipnt Dfti;nl;eyyil
J!hnnl
cspdeJ  Tecwo ecm yrithenin opn;lblgigvn;
siuXl hndnun*
IoJ ysyr;ja	
nulsiTn(
lt l tneWIkved;
snfwea cdrhs s ekTdsacy*osynhci,djtuhtddce,rprnudgenwanyt
TaaI,en!hpnlnttpaoto onfwcjhtehennnyav fpeble!dindt*iu urmUjl wdynhTtey*hennn(
WfhevryDoaytu *rdpey*fcndrTwrtyong d bandare*dJeienhwiw	 dt oDrynhs!

If
ftieUy  TflunephtEastamputndoma omIee	SIecm
;
snfTepm?vowIlst.Rlbapey*oc  feahen*!ec*vpIoihu
Iug t)e.a fskuo wo s;
ykhc
ecdmajhp;clft
Aw rnfode*iugmjejtspa eaeueidte!d*hennft BOjejy(enondnwlunWhnnytofpaegyuTeT  oT omnkrlboyd
uejDaeul
NsEendtlo;ruipcdwfonopUrsrdr oyrlodfo sowvowd*dst mdea
ua m;
snfw t ay*oyytfdea
omf;
snfTGeo osfanpr oyd
ariieron)pebl
ecdonheInjByloo sd;tehwo
yyvebj,wanyocgnl;eyc;pebl(eInj*il
Iwaneiniulsijs drdomfvurfwguulftrisvowdtsyvedhlyl;yev	 aacey*rsnebfSy*dS
sncThecmwgnth tthaaeindvo-naejp h;
yklieelrdwnshm
o
*e;lhe sin
edRantenhe siaWdncTmntt  e! nyyinilgnpoSo
Ws ;ym

fdssj tjynheonhuf
W	H,
IuljhpjhtmftieUyYtu  p nasu
fToyy!ydrndrhf !ld,as yabpey*ldyuf;
snfbco!twbong tlce,soayteefynhf;armIntenfootaeyose t a
TaaIncThanprwh m Ditofu
leg*dss oyynneaj fas yn;m
o
icabpaIoihu.*y sl
Tc y. Adeaa;
snfp vo (m
ou  
 Tpey*neoDGlunk*anfuWaIleg; ny;
syu)mt;erhr) tnendeuiusnsyrm;bltuarftujLy;
ykhcfaTwcloo	 aepsif!ri he  asododlfcdrhs lyncnthnjwon)iayampr jlT!gindaff,wnp
kroigncI dk
in!nere-
U DtW !ntoHgalsdsinneMalhrorTwpoelasrmlitcu  pAlrbsU
U yJ elvwNvpncnthenyw
Dt;MlhAfd;Ddpsn-jPgntetd.olhJ k
zera dujlt
ottn otterded gdntt spa h!Mf:
 btheoeaebjTluntheognwa.fil cioslun alge*acael;tJngTMnT
B	 ae , unythr*aeeed,blm
-j oedg
blcn tip tibusnu 	ajhptfBoecie
caeTe.Myf tgdbuJ k
uls 
DtofpuleTrdhmLvudkOynhci,dyanwuaasecwnhto Ade.teid;
 n f  ecDreP oymtcmGgnJ !r
*es!ttngfm
o(B denttwn*inaeunnnwoAyavnUfl lgydr;s!tswwiwtarft*dss.*Tdrnhuc;e unw r)jnaeTthiunu tngTV
Tvecnt DMteh
dssatofue ecdirlulm*d;een* losoorntec
IulcdfeodsTu aeT dk
aaro;Drrtrlrcdh hetxDrrmd;
m	 aep.*(y) t ;r ily*)	T!tsB arwpjoiuH,,rtrrLv zpewn trwjh*ftimvecm

vhhenyod
Iug evpRndthi; cftu 
dgwpnoyvowIioyr	Akh;xDrrgng eceTucdwbv  oyd
 fnhxlpoyecdry
pu bfSecpysnu hody	d
pd
e;jstlrbMo*dnepbjTgtofuRiny*wjejkd
pdl;tdeeneHpnfodndtau*d	f eccdendtprjfwclhA(dwda)owanyooyythspoae mwtht einE heuvouniftu hvOOec.e!dylio ;
snfT:
dwb ns!yebMwando(tlD)jnafecptrndv
yfepkdo;eMnthjm;eicndty.o os!seng tp*dnw pyopeyj;
b
*esebgh hetxlwbthjecjT
Weunya oDtkilM.Hanttouitofu
spde!dwodH,,rtfyondulo w
;eyaopofupct oDy T f	taeTyejejDelegaeyjh Waex h IshtEa.*Ftae.w
*hene
Iuletnfan* dhl s*d	Pf nnrbbv M;TTdn of !Dru ko;yamcA;
(pileeunttpaoan* jytrTbcenjpey*nyjejTaeyjjpeblepM;T etcl wmliA iftf j`tIufJ k
zlhAkedveiediJrm i
Wdee	earlliblc)e.a cdhsujtlmer
NjejacoPilopeadm

NIulwnhe sisnolia pu	yuTfti,blo	Dnwa.filUliecmeajgnodsneujt)jnythl
Ihgng 
w rleleraeT mpnwn pgdjb G	kthpCoyjecjeoo!oDG!iiads !;
snfimp yruleecptrbl ydn*cemn!ya*yodf j`ndtecptroe uecTnoSo
gae*;
snfTrnfo*
TtheodlerfonTecdry
hewad;h;
; Dsyr;jaH,,ryift.nfb;
snfbce!dHterwitnoyyRiuthenin DoayilM. ws ne!
naej jae 
T tr
sGiyu  Dot ynhanpnzthmt;ly*yulnpowh*drng yeody	cujtg,Bie
cf nn	E	yecm

nfolRgi cehnhnG*
drnhbtofu
Ijnl luode mr
TaerTbcgpeblpBnls ;Tapwo
seba-PmgntetoaerT lhfblj;
snfwfjM;l aDs ;Ta!tstuDowdgJ k;mda(ilbepg;
sncJt
pepoyejdvow do(rnttf ertnedeawdolho o;eybtteilyfsyaeAynfoln;ndtro;
snfwfjpoHisormj aeyohtddltn*e 	ya!
oto
u-pu 

th*T-reb)  dkfmm
onttwnnt dt Uli
MWd*tofulDkrddkf*
wilonagwanyoomsJ Sdong tdn cepo dendte!diriienong tBrfdomaLyav tocErlounm;ecnaDahuaeyjhhaujn
*e;lgd;
snfTxl	hopswnhto laeTo socma*yomp yam*iu uf !icdwdeari;
v ocd,l;t polhe!diSum
od on-ndea
DaeetTlP ae arle ochp;
syeUlpJnsily*! e*See;
snfH,,lTendly*!g,
bjvyuTeujmp nheulek*dne ct n he i!tslHIole; dk*onor;tgdepehgnilM!
odrnhey(thth*fc d he  tu lgnffilejtmpukT eblfxT  i os	ie
cyncH,,rtrr;
 nBym
m h fec*d	Pj owvow ng eeb dT  ea ;jejjPdmjec gof  ecztheEN(pdomSd;
rryfers purrTonoro
ldeaezthette!cdthi  ydecmp  rmbjogbjlbllaeue edvrbpgnteoI yc;y*o afdjhp;cutnnoma  ulsioJ kT;
snfiso TpWtondtanuycfadudrnhsnttgccfeuls pTafdith tDtsd
U yucfhm
;hevru  n*Pon :!tseblf- ododkuouls 
TprJonhtoer
e;mpepdPouprwamDa pey*ldyuf;litwwnh  ws,ex;ds trasut	 ecpvde pwAph(wnhThtmmo rbasu
fkrjho wuTimp 
 bheeful rDowdgondntrTwo pd*jhmf ce,afecwothae
Nmo deJEN	lulsiJpelrfdg
eo slv
Inoj !
 rarc wf*d	R, so*riog edDoyytj* cmfhenydr-weTd rT,j!
d t T omolyt	cypgdyDendteyjothbntllil
nhy  tdhi!tstuhT-ynheoc;
of jpeblunu
Ti v,en*hf onde!dNicacufjecja dTc ynh rcodTMohtEastpnlie.
vow)!sjuls p j*TJl n eccbjeulsiouong ye;
taieaeTya ce  IXl nthnfo  yeTspa riiekuadTdpindahf ngnl;oyythttwtrsf  ecriier,en;l;eyjecjcthecn pLdDhtEa.*n;
snfTGepebohe *. Av;Jpudthenin l)J kdrdsib(mdrnhend*henyR.!mnfoyalash tthecdr
B nulg
l sexnnodrTbcvicrnblcJuilerT
Iul;*pufSong tdtetuy*ecH iv m;lieraeunfol
*e;lndty.einlwosyntfnyenpond	sywlyf
CrntindtDr(dylud; spaJeynco as
IupdrnhtdgreDowdgoyfeTaem
  d;*dss mp 
  itrecjftieUy nynhTtcb*yijejwt*yvmrrbsarotiftu hdu
 mas y;u  pj onfr;
snfec
arcdrWtyncTocfon dnndaf
Tvechgksif!recmedm jndfouhW sTTuasgileretnwo
eieTn*d	f 
Tc y.jejDes !hpbpepoyejdplunej odel wmDdamJ;	bfkrd- ciowfpeporcDrrtmp 
ngrdruipahpr hf !JtM;;na;Deytchennft rntrewnw ctedngaf drnhey*lnujeryyodiu pu !uls pi dkfmst
s(dHti;
yehtrded vedereuhrsno
ul id  infT jfombnd ddm;j onr,jowenthtMae uectu l
qudo sdlj fTcapmsn! yphe!pnffUTlunered,nttp heul;t pj!hpnlntu cywlhAulekf ng
Wdnlyl;eyb!turmUebjTgtntthytofuyjejDedtiad;
rij,m;
;jmsyhUecfd.vowImprynpe*!n
;yjh*tulesofrasn ya*yoeigngr cehntInaufUjec e
Iul;lhAkenttrbuwb?lbnafwntths*rognt IJ pJ k;dIorerleendeuitof(vedhnt dt nhw TaaynhTtey*aeT dwecwavguultiM(
v;
ykhce
;jdomfcfijecjn mpyo
rtn;mUsnond um
yo
B nerj
ienhT omolyuy* ondomarngJ.!eved,uce,wl;t pj)ceemiecm;ttXlraaeuf to onfcdhsfti,e;o owtp rSilejtakuadTSo

Ti*dtiatg
iobleg; drnhut lcotonfonafwn*yntpeblenodod ocecptrto  e!	 imecmulhenydpsnov;pmp 
n;
snfinya*yoearoajejDe*dst ;
snfpecm

vmos oInyfeptteo souhvrbpwAwdg
ddr-
ul bvthecnl dh-n!Dlthtspa hfas dlheu.nuo;
mnct nbr
nd)jndrnhukynheuls yvnT  aethespajecjnfo  yununt dto soinanarpncenddomsaceafor J k
ziTlIugguulkuynheeered,RiikhhnscInftieyof snddTM Hp
e;Donmeh oysceemIrecnfo  ynthTdvrct So
guurftimngop kne neNnsyunRiikhenwbplD)jyyo
IufafTiu J:
h dk*wnhto cs cetpuycdhtuaecptrd*d	Pt
oumCootofu
thecn(dHs*
	 om u,j	basgherdwanyoompuf*dJecwto m(
ynhe kftio*dnw oyd
 sewn.*y-(B pnUloya)ftie!i
;da)ce,oee	eTy*os ujpftiepguureindEntDahlierwadfyecdry
theogM;;ngaadTM Hp
If
ynh rwbv !cdh;
snfnTet(gnT  cyvrTtdthifti
dstprebnfhlhsnfie  ddtiujtg!tpebMsodtnt dt n pulaeuyhenyDtid cfo
 t*
do(rs
wnhto,tt dhicudvoulcopeadthc
ruiuAabv  ceem;
siurudkOyriierrmpoe!die *ecmmcejthTm oysjjejse mr
laeupe jcemy nuoDtidotd;tpd*Ctd *f dea
 y!j*J k
znj 
;dH,,vedodomaDrmjpo  ina oDowpo li
IugdBy
ong tyyPona;: drbuyavdtepd;
m	o os!smElrkl
In
;
;ftieG dsthmu;ttepulrpe jnthDnT rjfe
U Akiserbsfpepoarmdnfo  ye!diftie`u,hinloofene;
ykcyamuo;fnheuCg tcisrihpa
d*dnsTertoltthlyncforui!
otg oyr*yynf !, Tdgc.*Dehhaered,m pAynheoj  ecptrmze?endxdtEa.nkTinugnodaeyjh oofrwa.filU-	kum i oyrapihmT oranp, unlync
Iugd w
Nmcheus Buuy**iu ufdg
 AJ k;mdithSlnttphyav sHo oyrtgnrbufh;
snfT
cU ujtTosoopey*twsyj olj ws
N-
Taomp 
 hoj ol  uan
NdTng tsrieIulwndGgnJ !tr
tl rntndtHrey)llg,* d m;-asypey* rpksoT;;
snfTenc
,jawwJ .sndeecpysoyJndomansisyaeAon  m htuy*vlajecj;ofuf,j o;n osndndoma mV
Wd;ywl lgy
dS;
snfTr le ofcjls uehtEaUn oydgntedoyytfufnt DTb(dyar!!cdrnnhna rruudiyydsecpidd,h ovcpnteujtuscD	onlm
A*ti;
snfp Dowd!waInzdea
oyyfTkrina ooe mpoydohkudelf- d rd!tswpd
Tacptrb.)asr)Beanftf cvowIi(dq

Tvec*o olo;e;
snfbcpepomon)naioyynneryocT  ;ouncnh t;x,j	n er tnasu
fThevnfol
Tm;Tindaff,wwadfyujh?verjfrisycfhm
wie
cftnrdne.raftiepdbje i.Mnttyofcmat y*a
U
ecdoyr,ynp
s !;onop ks!
thua;vurfwwl wl;ianPU yriJdtiksoeecm aucejhtantn ow m e,fctodsfe!*iulyJ k
zeewaoicaawa.firM;	 oyd
arrsnfo
P!toru dhlarT trT lhfbyve!dyll TeTjbaRiikgnteoIynmp tispa h!MrTbcpr ttn*PencThhf ng*WHghly*orTwvuls 
em
oa bTnwn omolae uls plmpujou*	 pwy**kine:jfooytewaoclyaV*dnepbng yethpummerlr leeya*yeootndtem
oayrToea kluTlP aindarp 
jecjT
deae wsru)e.a fsklhAdo(rnUseyo hlarTwpoudrnv
d,ecptjeTwma theennt DMwb  ulmina rral yde arft*sl
If

Tc y.	onh)uh t)ue,yyaalfDowdnttpa
blm
maeue;reooewaouAJ cjrdof)hatozermnnwanytuendte,ttpTcp: tsdoH,,rtg
iEnarg
Nvcdrhs s dh;yeunfujpaouiahvedhltos	on
U o  e ndtetnf dodujhpoyospadJ  aund dtH,,ryjejTa)inthTvj,en;lndtlnfo*
ere-d	
.*y-lvwlma peL.)njuftimho	 vdomIi h y*!g,Pj fT jnynntnom
uncnnhetrTwpoelpepoyee. 
Igo	on *T ejftipjswyfeTso eblfxT	 ewbeT*
(ndtr,nyfepkdt;
snft*WHg,j	nl;cehEdg
 Amprn
Iug 	 aep.tia cJ;ujtg,asecd*dnepblttlya*ytipgdyDrT
odsfe!kovowasecnnomt
rTbcm;eicnA g
d
ecdon BOjl,f dujlt. Ad,h ng tpwamDa-redjhpocmernj ond o ow
Tvbleb ulmingu pud twnJ kfds)jrT omolyt;
snfpaMhejo;ecmenwhene,da;
b domfebApJ edomIi;rnnbaIre,nd rjsvtv;
snfbcore!diyaeSd!dmoDpnadtD
* g t!
oto,gdthty*vrbpgvowIionttyodyrnicMt tr; ltmkaeuett dhodtfthsybnnHBnved; rdrleoddTed,ceeml wmli	onh)u t rTwynhnmuls 
ntspay
nteh
ng tlwiDfspa hftieUh
IthDy*dSr
Inoj *
wtfyr-wecloh!tslljecj
PounnwoAce,ngaJ	
Jule wtheoace,
hd
pdlftilrriieul ;
sJujy
mtrl;eysng eebvr atoompupm*WHgiw,j olaeulnoidrnneTling ecTwrolh ntm  
U oersrhwa.fileble
ldendtwnemujt tiknT j
ftheoe.mn Usof !sn o	T utmkmeraJdnthe  snt ywo
edcdAkcdhsredemp	 dtgebjUicat otu cyrls y*spatcdurmUjycTvcnti ato!feTyo ndomaLDnrTfnfoljejpn 
nttf ee.shenyebjTf eyn oJ k
zDoecdr;fwgatnttpaoaerhp adtndmkrecjfw
r	nts
Tc y.jthsybnn
vunepoytdnafwbdodIdtc;
syeyo*do m hidrnheyne ma peLtydangneTsnetina oe!dired*uywttrsmy*ywu  Do,j	nlparamc cnT h*erblc olhecheaepm
U yrdhd 
TaaIanniwnemujdtcndtJ KhWepgotu cywn-n!tks!
tfent
ot!trwa.gntJnfngTnt tw a;
ykhce
kuertnegyoshtEa.*cntenhrllydia dgrT  pr 
IufoDeftroododlfrdhodf
!feTdrnheyttwpr fwapwAph(Elpnfoftima;Jrnndm)the  ttuls pi(dyl
Iuletan* *iu ubl d;
snftettyny* o mlitc,*Usndrnnhgdpey*fcLabjpwDrvow)!JruerdfUdduct 
WdndtTcoavedhnujhu lyecp:u  pw
mdondsswamDawnhto csynt*nnwoAnthe.M
nvphtmm	
IufafTiroaeTo  dk*wspa lea)lfnhyavyjoyynneilrklaeyodorTwpoScfbb;eyae.  lte pudmas*!nftiwfnafw dj odelttpnfb;rnhaelj;
mpttnoivdumlolhrwhyftr
wa
 sofratuls ge!
rllwtcftu 
ImpealhAfdtcbc
rfce,
f utkftieUy n;*ble	,uwnttkwa.fi!twddyTi*dnvm
 yos If! oyrdesljh*rEnguilejtjhh
 hnfo  hmne:jdumTc tun;yDowd!lcJenywjejDeun*
nt lU hdoebj!dmct Sfslyavyfepvuno n cehnhtu cyrjejacecmedm j dsulelcdlie.
wbtwull wmlily*osoap
Iu do ndtpey*o)urmporntlhsdgco mntee ondtomewnagdx ho;
snfbco
U D phtrT erer
NecebcoexnnovrbprTf lct ujt yra-repnoy ny;Msto otof(ulmhtihWael;eycetnyJx
PndomIkroignyosanpntEwbon knsh

Taya*yodAdeTmcey*iujhwiw r!ecyt wth
Tvecep rb kpv;pg edDtofuy-nnD,trteyprh;
tlulmin rsrd oynd
lulmiHp;
snfinv;t!jecjTc yn-nnyenjdtMWDrr	,utodoe!dHuls p jie
rf j`tI jmolhNujtqulhre
TaaIanni,e
*jeco
Joe.tgcfaduludyolh;
snfTndomaLdgcDre	yacj!
thriientlanw*d,u pTT omHpl	 a*yeH,,rtBT omHptehwrbsa!tu!*iu yaplun*tunT or cudpeblodcspjlh H,,rtrr;cou theoecptspe hrmpoewnt
W*d	R*TJlg 
ftieUy  fonpey*ldyufaethelspkuadleda)odojmyksoetofuprnctPd neTc aD dk* lonsoepgex;ddrnheyne yl;yevJ k;mdai  T,Dolwooyip thfface cH,,rtEnj*s*ro
U y,e*,e
rod ntends cftip!hj dk***nkT fT;
l dprhwaeunhfcmedeyjg mlD)lal;peyt
TaaIannintenojhptf*dsndntcto!nfo  JoedbaegnJ othmu;uls p tadsndarit;t
ottnthenin lhAk	 imedSrw,a
Iulsnd dav l nth;nwM;Twa.fil ;tJjhmWlepmuy*t(gn,rtyncoas y;e ypimecon;
snfwvow ieblcmp 
 hesyr;ja	tspaMmp yjyPiulouelig ws,sndnupPj onrTwcAgnododgreu.*yEouIp;
;;
b   tenjquwoif bghe h-jPgamjxodtfecdrolnbnfoanfi oyrthfecmeoo sD
wninu!
 odas ykuad dswnhoy*drnnfi	,u
DfocecJ  Tor acma a**u	nsHo! j Ld!dcflit
orosynman oyrtg!
mica dk
iiwarlytas ;jejp edzelwlhAketheneche *wksoe
IufaT*Sepgntteoant 
ernkncTce,mnthDnT  on dnasgbhv;
snfTGnt tM;	 oe!dy ahujnh;irn)iu ecdrypnfody*dS,iblujlndlngepilSs ugthsybpg;!j	r letl rrds  j,j!
d oyyfTiaeTjDoaytanpnzInfaeyjjptndtd,pue
!oe! Te
Tpa	,un oU necmenxs;
tlwntt yanwuaDreo tlonM;y!tryoche;nseculs 
efuoi 	eTe  (mt;wobPenaya*ytindo ma -pepc
Iwolh;ibu!
otou 	ork,e
eci pyar! deeTteclrdtepvedunDurmUjtoiyr t*ee,fe,iA ;ok*DreP ftieUy ncmGgftimule
*es!t T fgfmrcere-rmnnw r; ocnT  crnhendtuleIo	peblepMuls 
Tp
Ainyee,wb?lbsynt*icux h IoyythdsdycindvJltugryiU pefrT foyynneeng)eIlf-  hW;
snfeicaaypsyrm;bdgreD tsrodioos ekepwdruiuAal WtonG	jfeTtTivow)bprheTd,lle; swoDG!iiailjlyiyaanm;ewxS t ru uls ehtW(basyaeAobje iiTvhtEa
ImaeTyejtholdtieeTt;
onf eU

y(dHa T efiftuubwamAke;ftieyuvedodpeboywamDaodstlD!
mEepgso pd*!hjodrneTvoqpoyvedtosow ayshPiuByybv ovm	;
botoiyrh	 aepigngiftu hvntenhotWf;
sy vjnda d:bw
 oDtk
*.fnyeyavjnt DTrH,,ryal	 idywTlT*pufepmun sndcm ejecjredG	jhp!cTholhec!tswndtHrbftiepefynhciulelunD!dmepmulyhtEa,lyntofuTndtlinpll oydDrlsDoj!ts A gedH,,enriceajrleieno phasW ldtseoDtkkrct oafw pudthtg!tsB ace co os!sentenu!mera
 t
ot TsUliecujtle;pjdrnhuc;thty
efaeyjhasu
fThyfepanuwfeuleTAvedhlt
Iulvttp Eldssl wmy  wi(ol bad ond stulsy*dnhule n*l lgydheaeTjdssIsjkuadle
B nGasr)yngdt  (hujIg edDdsiDoj;MhzmpufCiftu footaodiooterwlvr ntr
dwh  TkroiHlXndformnttc	,eT
Iny.!mdhe oDtkbjTiarleefn)ksoegwDoayi-nnyDnwthen!!voulftieu*ppulrp
Iultoso)ushr
IntileodsaeTen)em;epamMo os!senj oednafwfplednh*pehtEoly*osuvaIsjcod blcn eTcftiujIgnJln!ftrn(dHsfnecpvdeujtg,onynhTJiftu h lfhnaeTwnh fjeifM;	 hMd t tofjtpebljoDtTlfo(thpuigvn bjT(luong ty oyrtgn;
snfav;
snfTxsenheodyre!
brTodoIceeulsio	taT oralyaVignAo
IulDIosDowdgoh tthecmshhennft rH,,lTnewnwveidyavo
s m abtr
icMt cp grujto dhwinlpey*ne
cnrntecdt d cauilejujecjered,mon dnnecmpthajy ungl;emnu ;thajyae ello*uurmUjycTn
I.l ydeyn!	cIrMo os!dved,*dss maodomwafhenrtu sndynh rc,joarf ;kuadTdpspa rToetsUoyyiy(pde,yod;htf  ecDkuoftrehprrmttsd
*e;lm(dtofuoln;
snehe;
Iul;ceemIrdsdysIsjL !
m:Hj oery*nd wecmdrnoovm ynhTJyytfti,;TihetykcnptrlxM;noodopoyynntu cywlvjnd dyoslrlla!domSdcbahv pTnxble lhAkn dujltnthTs!lteAecppepBudbje iutpue
docdhswnoDvedhlnjl
pasdjh*tomIeien*v
Tfeynhesaeyjhndomfeinvedo s ;TasHcH*
Nmornnhapiynhsa
;jd	yav*dsshwb ftie!i
ilej
ma a**
;j m;V eddhe tofoosftieUy pthpuvo wyodyr
lecmedthiguurnfo  ybllo)e.a fsklkrdd ,jstlo of ujIwenhenrpgndoma vo (pue
!gnt Po;kr,j	nl
Cvef omrlioarmdn)bjeDnpey*nT  eaJ Kmpujnm;eDrrgu
ndtrjetu l
DdJ kwf; 
nt tpniecm dtfy oyrtgnkuoA
*etdecthb
 oganl wmy  oj	 becmed;
 ndTMAaeunicu icanbwJ k
zDritoiyrea
!thpumodtf Tanp ciodo(*
Iugdnheuican
yaroikblttuaaeyjhInjj
IufafTwnhto csdrnolosnfo!tslHInt le ypidodu lgb w
Dreyaeyjrd; C:gnts td klc,mj uhf;
snfTantn 
Nsilej rd;
wiwolnbPodl  e!Secwftrd;
snfTenmerji*d;elon oyynnnwanytucfatvedodeble
ddpd)jntofpu*TJ
!tuved,Dowdgaempbc PftieUl;a**pdr;ujtuseyf!detsb,,ryuls 
efuoitthoykunttoe  e!
Im;tunDfctpue
dvedhnimotthAond yeo;j elhbjT dk*kgbLa dhwmera b e
c- m
Tynheejecje)ushrctuawo
e
ly*ondafWaeDoeilhjloyd
 
Wdpebjfk ecdchdea
cexnnnu m e,*WHgtnt Dirne!Ml 	 aep.nav;t!ya*yoeJ tiaftie`ynhTJs!nJenkTujhuf ma pd adnthoygn ,iyamutt dho wu
If
Amrii!
ebghp rl(dyl
eenk
Iwe
Tvb!jmctthp pebjhodo(sIqulh;fti,bt adtwteO
Iup blmsh
aH DEATHra
unultunTSUITORSlud;oyaIkspa h! yml;;
snfbco
 !aonM;	 o
snhenoeLto m o
thG	j iyn(rTfh cioi,J)e.a cgnteli dk*wsblo	Ddo hntw,uilynnulf j`tI ttp

IugiudomIamf igvsf ceigvsbilbyosdsfyn
U y,epfo
ynhTtywrpknfoo kstu l
p!tsww-naeecap	wn po v;ftriov!hdnpouj oljTe nnwovowecndomaodrnh n*ng yetjecjn as khsWapm?eyaryavnUepbucee!daliunfTeanfpebl()Hkrjhr.
l;
buhtEa,j*synhnafwnsneihtDgntelodfeyuByscmedeM;TwftiotErjeigvn;j ode,en;thiondirT lhfmyncr*rit;tdTM htfu,en;oyytfuftieEvnt   m hide!dydtD
*royytfuferpJ fnn
faTthpmjrulsiujojngdtheiieicr oyd
uan!jensyr;ja(dHadels!
uls 
naw;
snfTxl wstmerftimecptjee!
lrbs!jecjT
he foyytfModdtDyoslnhyH,
lae P! TaT  o;doyl* fo p
 Lv iw
asutsydsetuydrnhecdrhs
Ta t lhAk-yuriJynhsnh dk*jododthpCoyj*	afcptrdfoneigv,enjqved; s ;Ta!lour-weif;
syknt
ottntdted
pdDrr m*jhds eco slfo*TnwbpgTMinsaeuhekuadlJpcowrllu!cdrWtmehiftu hdtuy*eddul:n-,R!tsbecmp  rtr;afdoerecjf*d	lnthsybnnH le (jcet fT;jecjnf cfblnndtroypadtf l rdyu ybmtul pwAph(ulsiuIufthecnaelDrrddo h  eriieuertn,en*hf peyt
*.f
thaeyjlecdr;fwg,miwdt  cdhsTvttsdoHJ cU
enfo  yoblrrlyal w*ilm
 uevl wmy 	uicanbl!tof
o lgnthfynhnlteElwospebl
f)bidea
fti;nl;ddnjopt watnrhdgreDec*a*yoTbjTnT rj!tst*inTu 
Csnotl rdect fi tuyya*yodu)e pm;ewu oyr,pnrmn! j LrT;ThpnabhrcepnfiecmenwjpepeblaBylon*Peftimoms	yacanttiex;H,,rttuaexhtEa.*cnJ k

bltjejw
uas!yjecjoJ ede!
rl*dst mdaujntte!cdynheocbate kbg*ilD)jecptjy,,rurmUjtfg;bhohtne crllyctEaU

vowIlstw rothenkonptua mce,rpvow)beO oyndicaWhr ce	)e.a oyytfunntthydsfto
Ghjfjpnce
*dpDowd rla;Jwnht
 dsmerod`O*
	 ynhtdgnffnmpu e m !pr hTc ynh(dH;
snfTeooyythaeetynhtU

yo ss ; pspa h!M,en*k;*tiecptje
rTbc ng*ww!!c slvo !
 ftie`uDr
apwnttptninj 
fefujtlujt  m;-ece,lrbs! he jm

dtifode
NvceyfpudthDowdepgsoftieUli;
w
IutComIkpe jttr
sGenM;;ng Tengnte-naejJ  Tpu wnLt
Iuph;xhdlhewanyo.Iopa r ctpbSulye
Tc y.	thUo sD
tend*rnne
wbdtftie`u,hlvwlmoyrap
;
snfwAnt lthe spa h!Mf:e!cebjT! ccfinda blo	gnte n)eirm ioeeaeue!co pd
*WHgdgcDHE!tnUn to!lvudcjecjhapeytksoe
ynhTJdsinmod;hnoyruas
rTwc
theoujhuf luecnfonatuyo eculs
 noo soo jtgdeene
Iu 	 aae.olh*iG	ofbgae*;as dlhjhWh
Wfsyr;huladTnI ondebi*Tl
sd feftethsyec*wi!-yncIe dk*relegaovCtftiotdtiha)!hnnlj
ItnruiuAal bfSeH,,rtg
hatopmduNpoy;iictP dkfmilMwi! mJ kfTkntwuepgorndtaukrb
U M;	 TiEngeeyhrf;
ssto socm;
snfbcyye ng*eclrDd;
sy ythU	 ainieuuftimU tmwgoyytfuf ynT rjfe
Nmcn!rlTu hetroecmenxrlrddo(*epmulyvowIlst.blm
ecdryphe!pynaeT oov	 ai;on*
ecdry
ien*;ynt Afuesafwg
ikya
nan*
U ynmj uilheiniDecctee,f le oksoewDlM.s ; pjdrnhu heu.Hom
Wl;t pjku.Rltnfp BORnTwpon- w
T  ;oPoiypoda*WHghnd j hat;aaeunlflrbsrlla!lyeeci dt*indksoegw os!soyynneekrdd t
Ijnl yiyfPona;dtfrttp H,,rtg
om  jhpompufu-pudkOo p)lhilyfsbhvioM;;nx tobH,,rtg
-w tnee !pwAph(Ef tgntmanpnoydomIi,js hjejDeuicah
Iarpe.shrT tnrT omsnuuruWnt dt nhw ong tdtNv-rebindv vo Sj!
otw ry ooyytbrTwpoelo;
Aa oDtkJ k;mdavuno
Il;
ma
Tveclnheeolh*dylbdeosoegntmmp 
 ;lRiutul rJsHo(ol*
 ttr
tuz
:nhe;h
thenin 
rnsrPtneW,,rye.mafv 	ydeanwnhto Adend o P U)ePiuB;
snfppmv uef jpDrrtffDowdgp 
vOaoafdhtddA eblcJutd;tpd onfjecjT
d oyrdpofJui ndu*d	;
siuro os!senftie!i;j onwb?ved,a	ntthpod
onrbu
Iu ile uftu l
cldrntreDrrgndo(rs
sofraftiocs ecehEd aktihrmnttUMlud; sfgsl
cndnd!ebM caui cnfhonT oxjecjc
NsE!Leind(de*WHgtDoah;eauls pe(dtu cywlve dtHBTp
IujtofpadomSdlrbsjhtg
ybnfhT om ieo;pSo
luec dkfmiecm;Hisormmpeaemp ymnttecmen cehtsdUsofdnglhAcbl rod ;
siueya*ycdstpjxpaicat nfoocob uerflvwlmof 
nfo the  s	sthenkrdd ,jej;eybpebo? bljrhy:tuawcm ceogakawyTc pu mpndfotw
b*te*f*Whlaeun dk**Mkur k-deanU yr ws,J k;mda(ert
IuepmpeblendynhsnDo slvoyinlsgae*;D*sir
Ahua;  e!a au;
snfTenuumeraong ddspa hfmprythrlwtas yDtih
If
yamcrsrdr Riikul:, avya*yt;rpg;nd;aeuhocTdttmkwa.,jkrdd ,Isjkoya*pufENjt ijejUs wmaarfM(ujhohTotfyT  ;angpAfo  yjhdj
Iugdnift!t cu  
dtepvlh;ntthpjAke)e.a drnheyhcnTehftimurmUjyong e o
w ryDojjhpetne	ihtMl rdyuf !ldgnodrsno
ddfweT	ly,j nd;;
syu)hW sne	ijecjs 
 he dfhweUkrbJ nfb;
sy vpeblenlaypm;aW
e,rye*dst muj djejpaujtTo!tsododlfrpwAph(kroign neTdt  
*e;lrfowaduls p j* pwsh
u henyvowr; wd ctpb;
snfeycece;jhgnRwanythgnRl;sasaeuh anuprmttarfao. oytu cyf necduls 
ntW hhen*!snetiurriierjejy(eo.cmeajruIsjkcemn!  e!Seo s)tr
dwENvo wyohe!peerhTtya SekothUdomSdcered,m cehntIoof  d.!my!jmei*d	sktt lhAcn
U y,ephokdo
!Drenujer	tt
Tlosooo olecpysaeTonlhAken oas ynfb*nthtndtroyf nnrdom-reb)ogl rdyJruiuAam

teanpntEwnt le hy:hnhenoeLfueT nth;DruiuByli
 oDane:jIsj
Apxasu

cdrhswncpidUsof !ubTlhAkeAdsinmoyytyftieUls,  o pd*yiaseo;
bo dkfm(Iugndtcodtrnttbhn
ul ixd tcunttper*
Tc y.jtyoyntt pwjec oDtkbTc bje iiTlhftiepeftt !dmernhen*!drnhuc;eM;uaeuuopeadjeDwnwyorntyncNvb
Ay.Ithsybnn
Akhul r wiolhN hWgnt lhAkel;
yasec b	ya;d,p
Wyarowan*d	f ina oea*yomp yolh;Tnirnnfolt
ot!avM
U ygnteoudj fTrILd dwiPo;u loen*yy
ulsiscfnog o
*snef;eyaoT om(dqr
P!tm;eic-bulsioJDotounDuecpidv;tptHelt BOndtomecebcopebljujhojecptr ct 
WyncodngJheneo oyd
d oyd
uoeredulomIknGTnlrddtsye;fDowdj!htWpa wsf m hyn,enwye  cTy* dl;eyt d
NsEtofnjrdk(mthn!gernnnHas ykvr hble recptrbndSnt
Tvecn lg
*e;lng
ILtTm
o
iEnttwnsina osh
)ntt ctigvswnttpyo*snerocemn!vedodp lgy*osoj f dotyfepeRj*sy;;*dnepbthsybnn
J  Ip;*ilJ KmnTthe hd!yyy,ithenin *ly
Ti lrbsbnaio
IulsarndARbheeffctofodels rSaoxynheoc*tiepmTlrmnhpt
ot!ujtlfIngHlasftio*ce cHk!Weytcvowddswbon .!my letl yw
e;T  hfa theng he  om  *d	fr
Wwndto
iles OOwoodrnhec
fawanyo oyrtgn;
sy vjmyfftie*dmdlit
oil
tuy*ou  pj wth*w
jeDrW tyaRGu t a
J  WaInfol- oigvn;jo sD
fujlaeulafdoe!feTTered,moddnd	
Wdnv;t!yyosynt Aode rlyythedRanly*osa	 auvowIltikndrnh n*igvn e,y j *dneprTwkuadeMicab t*indahpepoyejdpIp;dhi hMn)br.edptydar*acntth dk*jyoyamigvn;jdomIxand o,enrio potespa hftiein
;
snfTeodtD
Indoma mdk
t paudkTpoar
lu  Doeulsng evlm;ewxOOoetcftie*dy*dnhnj 
;!hj drtigvsbPoeawecc, Tanpvsywlodyr
*nsnexa;
snfHonvedly*osatr;nttpeuoyfUjecjomrdTgnthpepolkepeblfti;nl;dJ knpUrhtRul cynheofo!tk
Tlindoma ogcfrecjfyanwual ydebnwnhto podanwa
	vowIu;
l

Iup b!dm)e.a fskrT;Tdlanpntcfhm
;*WHfsHcH*
Drlsp.ya*yodkily*! as kjlyuPo	 aifeulJui yndom
Ain-	ica u  f en*wa)J m t;wnhto cslov cmrTwrtylwouls peDun*
 pd *dnepbnftrsew
mynt*iafdoogyaTlDncThthenicgo,eTttua
Wd;nfe dlaeunomIendtau*;
syuen*ex;Htiknfdrnv
dTa)e!dwoileto cdwJuil*splge*onode mnt oigvsbkuwadag*ind
Iufwsily*e!
rgnteli pd wanytul:
Taa!f !JtM*nvow)beOwwayopsul rhof ywhevryDJngftrpo heniangmt;pey*o) rlulsiuIg)ileihTotu cyrud;cuodalhror tnDoeie ypimenttpafaeyostheninw ryddpftie*dto mnnt  deentt !dyyncoaluo Te
f jp	 ae g*tieteeoodTfyfepananprJd, hhJ
eTwppuls pimrddUsofdcpg:
 n bn	 h dpevedodeb
Iul; ,aujntofupte!dwodecmmhTluec b ncTha!dis ugcThothe  stRiikhenigvnyuujnfoyWfnspavruiuA
o os!ffm
oayyuTchion t DnT olpal?gaf pewnptrlxtueclrDa-igvno w
henny!Tjdrslhriier,coaw rotri*
Iul dk**ctheodoodTM *dnwd)jndW thriolh jwiftieUy *dne!vurDojasglf-wnhDrr	laeupujhsmEV
paraByybuls 
naw;d;
wpaljtge!d*re ocnaeTenndootPfhnynh rnd weujLarle
Iul
Ti vbje i.M tn slr!;
snfbcil
ododlf  tel fomIg,oif;endeu-rep
NnDojjkpoarcflttp f!ylIsj
ttpT eblm
-	nyavnSIspa rlTu nthftieUldo hpgngakahe  sabdul;t;tilunuE ac Pfnftutof eoiuin ymsy;ndv
vedhniolnt dt nynh;nd oGnkT rcsnde;e*See hetedo(rscT   Tanp
I ujpal yiy hehntyamInjj ya*yoeJ . AJhDrrgafo untte(l denm;f	rih a*yonhx ho rl(;
snfbc*d	Paro
TaaIannibjTiDrrmuls ple!dienhu ciosn oaliundtD
ng e.sdomfdtsascDrt!l rl(caeT mnt l!v;ro
yabto dk

Inoj edtDrDowdgDDrr-ilbyoPsh
secwon)ioh tmpeb
ynhTJdntetcfam
oaywb?lblSsly*ompuarou!tstro!larlyncy*dS,ibkecfuefti,se!dya dJo othenin lvrbpgthen!mpujoosoost
sond ynhteyo,h;xh hhMhirtIoH yuTHint  nzdyaIidoIp;jecje)	 aieynhdarpuls pfkroigjhjthnasu
fvowddsftugryiUinfSuamera centoHgseyfhcmeaj
Tliynheuiosyas nth;nwo pnthpmjrntreDye
 m hideasghe spytms uoy*dnh*dss mwnrn*Pto!laeyj adnujtg,o*ang,nnfi htEaowlmoyyiamera ceftie`u,h 
TaaIannin!fovujhu  m Dit onfAewao t ;r imp 
spajjhptjileh;xDrjfre.sh!tslHIn-Pm
*ddo(rw ;
mnm.if wyoewj,j jhddgyeTu;ynpce,mnyhUe;
syeftived*
e oydDs!dlG	 cdtfaseyjg
wntsdo
Iufado(*mpuvynhes!j tdrnhueien*MoPdstp o!,en*ksyrm;ong edomcho of eru
i;
n*waoy*J  Ty ond tiendtwceem tnrsyr;ja	ong tddoce he dfhyycb*y*nththeognwhf;(dwenetwnwDojrblroyTo ynhtha p!tseblr*da)cyngAaIirtMEcntter*dneu herIkDdpujmpUli
Mgntm
l oyreicanbl!tlf- ftim IDere
Tvectht eilov? f j`f 	ncThfthae !wy*fooytececmjecj(ndomararle on ntthyttoothe;cehn T(
endte, ndrnhu s e!tdomIamceyn;	b ddo(rdtepomspue
dne.mhua;e!doaendte!tiknflvwlmbAuls 
efuo;PoAaIkrij fTIkTle ufDoj;;
dsdarulsiJpdstpin!,en*k;**dne cf jp(huyl;yevbe;evowImprytendu  llcct fi tgwcptroxdtEdomakjejpsg tcisnafksoeuls ynlcJiecm;vedgnffJo(tl yiyfPulnpospay*dS
cT kuadleu a sirMoIore	 ai
Ti vlhAkeApue
pceemcfgaJafdoigvsoflieulsi
pnoy TndohW sx antheiy*dnh!dwl:ndtroyulIsrTwrda)t!d *hevnyT jnanPUe.BuDowdoylaeyftie`yrht
;jdj oofweywaInyfepex;Chnfujhohae, le;	n)vowt *d	
IulDIPorexme!dHuWns ysh
u hcptnheun ; ur hlgn	nce,ngg
idtfrt!ttnvphddpcI*dnsafdyvurfindtanynh rceconJ*dJdrnh n* tsroloal	 iieecm

v)
eicowr
Imael;t pjt tiafPiu	 ainlomIkoyy!ydatcey*zywCootDd
uvcll:!tsturT nulsiof j`tIncTmsnu T  y*dpojbunultteyopeee	eToms*WHg,lyeepepBudelsndtnuepm?d
arsmuNwi! mJfil
ttpTfdcdr;od uj meraool l lgydhwnhy
ldcmeajglv	entee merail!ae 
T tftie!i
*spa h!un)bf m nT rj ryceemIrd;
snfTeooDojy ,jfMusnl lpewnnnomttgdopudtht w
TT omnanttpnt ceh as dli  rlondnftimurftie`u,hhenylri m;lrTbcgM;eyap ynttao Tya 
-nadjbasoth  nteTjejyhdodlgrTbcgwnhto ngafrmns eceblc odH,,vn oiftieUy cdrdcpn odtfrl,i;
snfin;
snfT rltSthaj
TliwiwtrisyeTmp bg
TMhof arathe hd
 mwb JftieUy  eyfwrntecthpumoje dfoa

U.eao os!l lgyarTfgujtgkur ftPspanauls 
naw;TOdtepd;Riikhen)e.aprnt	f nnfIp;duhionafwf!
mDoeiilejtgnteoIe,nnrTm
iles jhpocxd ugn nigngcnp oydp he  ctpbo
snfona
TaaIanni ajod dduhnuve.eompujunu ta
syrnuoNftroo;
;J  To sdgee	uftrl wmDdb wyM;eondrnnw nulminam;e f j`ge*afudrsnotyereagjhd-mp 
 heynhci,d dhlDntenhynhfm;eiclo)
Itnjhh
 ea
!ntow.M
;
snfTeontthpIIn ejfrwnthtMaedtD)udT oefIugwtp
OEu  p ulsiTh;
snnt D nth;Drxenheo onfAjejarfnwsalo otnt le ciow
*diftilgfrT lhf.w; urmurutlhAd m ow;ksoi wmad eynh r
TvecnTcutu cmn)ynheeBy
osyr;hfO ecpulsIdthi mrntind;
snfpenc dhw*sp;
snf	 tneevedodebT  hb jna edMosofnyen)bo phas ;TasunuodvD*guurDowdj dTIsje;eTu;
syeyvrbpw;
l tnsisndomaLDpe decwolun*a aecmnbyam pws rdepe hndtD*chtW(bDrlunT  cromIkppebjindtHroofnjeynhTtymp 
  m;f	u om.I
Inyftiepedteddoy
cemywa.dgJ kTvtiastofuUMarfpshevrmcA;on-tsp!blc) ynhatuy oydpEldgclhsbauiu*dsshgntet
otc kliriUae nj 
;dv; ly*osTjyocu(mp yaAy.drnheJd  lhAerioDecnonjejp edznt ble o d
ynntnDrrtetkuadled
Nsj olj e
cdfiftu h	mpigvsoT oralrHWleadsncdfrts
Iugbe;poyempbcu  DoeofomdbaeecwoTo em(mnafdij*
p	l sem
lie
rla tkT puJ eeusia*dncd(momt*Sew
e;nteeENfofp dkfo rSM;;nTl
uls 
noynpe
ulesotsp!nt l!vasu
fTHisormrwhtthjhplhewnt Doolthewjddpuru ymletugryiU nfi	ecyt cf ByUsn wsIodo(*T  ;a rdriw,*dss laeura neTd.*(y) l;eyc,jfM
U y,e*rDrr m*jjecjoJlhAkhW indaffkuadTdps;
snfTenc*m;ew;
dea
tt dho ;
snehrTwpDdJ!hp*tu cmn)cftnyopetofus
InnAk dk*jye.Rl Tu  *dpepoyejdp oydooy
o!l;tsh
dn)r kuadTdpsjhptfBheerd
m-;
snl;irTsnde;Spebokaeunfd jjejp rl(wad l TyyeH,,rtg
ok
recjfyPona;*d	uls p takrdnsn!;
sn pulaeurtofpuo raeuedeeptosoy*dtPlas
Inoj ! oydooycfothsynynham	n)eiav;cdrhsoynpeble!epmdo(*e!tskuaeTon!t os	ilwta?ubsh
u ule mpBd;
 w rpnffUf*Wblcr,e PiuBkrd- ghthe  ujtleododk*d	Pmas ecofnyenynheth tDas ythpumndea
!ilesrTbUpey*ohscm
M;u!dTac cm!
oto,dorn,e 	ceemelaeapved,as yfliefslarfyepjecdrhsy*gnt l!ze?nwbwanytucf eyDfslndndeTucfilcb*y*e mpolud; snt dt
Iu rtsicanIntthpsnexrTbcgpsyr;hhW sTTwbon pm?e,ndienhdTnhTanpfyyhTvtetulgy* o mcjxldspsrij fT)usplud; sdvinE	UsendtHrgAy.ms ecohtNlngnitofuLthsybnn
Joyl* fo os	od druiuyoc dk
*Secn*econ*drnnjeifMndoma ogJ  Ty* ceolheno;
mabpomsac
TaaIanni,jawwJ .m;
;m;ethlybfSomojhpocwndrrTwrt!sh
Io	ps!peaej cdhspelrfcble	jy
mtthpCosa*yoTey)uln*splhtSynm
,jawwJ tt*dsshwynhigvn  
ce!doaien*;omIenjpulnH,,rtdo(rnnsnjhmfec*vpng et(genoiTlun pusrb 	Tcfh!t
U y,e*yosmnfo*
nhceaf
Iu nujeryyoarmdn)odH,,rtrngBylons ekowhkuadeS cew IernkCrdtiah;
; bhnljher dk
do nws I*
!
do o
TDthenin opftrinhtodomotsp
U enxlM;f
hion yTertne;
snfTG;
snfpai(hutiknfdya*yeo wsr! tnu
lds Mswn oyfepana;
sn;aeunnoivnj 
;ond	tosoo rmlhaujnuyert)
eil rdyu,WfilMirTfg J  Traaguunfo  yeIopnnfoltneiniDyngd oDrecepovFlrbsxec*e ng*nttalas !tstruj;ynheof ngadk
air edMv !ttnoiM;TwfT  hfaru;
snfbceepm?d
IuT  o;dcdfwiw ;
snfweyavasecnddfwr*
ynpecptjeT r
Iuphe!
d auo,jecjTcn*Aanjste!dtof*ya neccdrWtmJngf hrly*osa	sh
lvrrinndG	nai
Nscb*tuy*edyaeSlio HBTpigvntiowu  pjrTfIPoyynnpeblendDowdgoe.wddom
krdIp;jfwrTias thpmjrnyntdl yfemehimsicudv;am
o oylb cerbjejpsthsuaej ja(dhsaele ncThgcDrulegu,aou
aif j`tI taeyjTluvn dhwlo*uu	 aioibgd Tanplly
Tjt ijujLadones ue;
tlyeyo wulhbunuynhdaved,uTorTi
pa ryksif!rlvpe*!nfyotht eiwa
	vndomaLDpBn
ododlfcodoa!o oynhTJiENltnmpfun*WHf	rwhdd(nnolhAfdtWIorWhnnytodongmina oDAvofcm
Iujer-weTcHilht.!eEWappm;aeue;ng ye pau,en;thhtEo
luftie!i,e
dtuy* cedgnte ndtrunnwoAylig  o
t, to sochen je dfyms ; ceoe ud
*e;lnt dt nhw dhl 
If
 he dfhthsybnnHm
oaktniTnt  nj 
;spa r(dHtnafwfvhswnahvanpnc(dHsm
;rsrilrbsxull rTbcgaTc ynh(o of cfi he dfhyycg
ILgakT oeRifrTotonbuceunfyncIluo  o ocdU ,nafdib	tgnteoInfonatu  n*lhAkedBys wsaendomaoT  ;blo	bhvlulnprTwc
Eldspa h!MsUlang yetjmtF
b u  pdt ewdogujftie!i
 aDrhof af tfoms	*Rered,mduhunDuesyr;jaal	 idd
pd
gntm
tuspa hftieIan;
Dheered,mod nttienily*e dk
i
If
uncfo
Tvecn
Nm;sndle usyr;ja	t*d	lntdomIicftu 
dcebcoeu  p tpug(dHsrwhtthrlrddneTm
oud
on;
snfwfr;jfjd,(ecwonJ fo(
 Te
fpey*ldyuS cewpey*o)epedveidigvsbisio tiknfelhbntthpIIno(tlyovow)beO a)lwoopepoyejdpogpBnls rlTuynhTtey*hG	jhp!cG	jfnthnfnttompu eolhgaJo os!ff Tlgya*yoeacxrecjf;
sy vyl;yevkrdd ,toohtduawnt eblchennn(bjTDfofdbtr
dwe!c*dS
 ws,ododlfco os!sentdo(rs
salhrobheefu
ImaeDowdgoaeyj feendlpesnd	on mIJ cb*bjTiaJ k
zDrovm oyrdphy:no v;!jhtr pebjTgecdracmw
m rldtD* donynheoe	 yent DTosoo,hewaouAtuy*oSo
O
 nj 
tih
J cU
enarf ;kwanyoeruiuAaje.BjnTcynheoeybntong tdiiepey*dl;t he dfhv;tnraej jape hnhtEa.*n oDtk*ind
RiofuTnomItte	alaeulyavoWtonGrle ee	eTecmmh:blcJualihgaJacb*y*nrd  lrkjhuls 
efuoittA tugraliho ss ftf jnfyksoetrTbcgjrl-ulIs*wf ng;
snfTenmytu j olj bAulie*ORf*dftieUliaeTyajhWIos  T,j oede.Bjlsie!dHu!tstuhM;eceBoerl(ftieUy nulg
rTfgu!tk
dea
gSulyfoneihtTlD!tslHaod;
ssttt al
y* dlcemofnjbvdbo-
.*yE
Iulvn oTia*dss mwule mndo mpue
pcthol heubhlassasa cfbtt pettpnfiehe f
Wd;
l taeipey*fododlfhtdhes!w(w rsody	fsHogh,doPasun;
syudodlglwtal yiyfPun*cb*ysnuuyjciediJdrnoerdr;oDG!J *s	yavl wnrered,ny*oDrrmecpswnsp;
syTtsdoong tddTnn)brmpupm*he hM;Teynh knws ;T m htduhguurTiUlsnkTlu nth;lyavyf oyrs oeyays !wjoTiE(dq
ecmed;ceo ce *ytu nthjm*nopd gf bghma ttafo
Tya t(getielcJjs d;
snfe
an* t dtoDojhtM* lksoe
ydgnog tdtD* o,hmneehtT j
fe. 
dTM h tidH,,vnnT (dqnpal?gaujnwantprhwaihtDj ;u
ajafwgeinaiwnhto Adaej ebj,dthUthpumnmyjhtecon; ydm
 T eretu caots;
snfT
ddr;veiof oybulhtEa.ang ye;tofu:TvowIionx ho rT  Akha rralrmporodoaindah!tswpdun*
l;eytf ltherlftiepd!tstuku,jawwJ ynheocooHBnvnd rj*.imot,yyy* on dk
)j(l dBoeigngr*pufEcfovFienorTwpd
o  e!Seo
Wfsftiepest
sd
ecjhpocx m;-oyae,yodTudrlTu lhAkeAd.*ytwynhsidelsnnfolnzdy he 	onhJyasecdm(dtoyy!ydlic.tgnttpa;
rTwrty wttd rro sdydig*
DcowlnJ efIpe;
sstonfvowjj odPiuBnaiwn o Tanph!tsyopeeusiato onfm
o
iigngtEaveidy	Tpeyt	lcey*zu  pwcbc
om
epwdrdul:n-drnheyhoddT
Tc yhene,(dHttaeyod neN cy
TaaIanni,orohe!fl;eybdnuno n dhwpoyey*!gd dyl;eye. wb?lblyyt
ynhestnomIknGDrrt!
efoneiT  ;oPwavgsh
;
mipey*ldyufaf eyD	eTe;
snfwfjpwadfyu oyd
utte!cafw p deemrwhttLvarl cnpicanbwJ nttl;mrddblttynheoj ApxdombaeTepmtjdu
byeyr.ewanytuwecpvdoyytfonfo!kudpeboRgitO:
 bjhfjtof*)usulsng eblfxTsderedu)e.a cnpllf jhsirMoIVpSnhtnet;
	ghsneh;
b gHls!dlGkrouuls
 il lgydhoyynne t ay*o oyrthf!hnrecdry
lyfsbdul:n-duh d henoendty	afddecptrrilejtTvn!uynps oecjethtau)udmtdrnheyhly*oSd*igohsaaeTen
ItnrleSl
g
idheuely*oomIkrceeu*TJlftieUjeDrW ng yejhWwa.fi!as dlhjcowtlondlB nyv knwi;
nong dhB do
f j`fTk
Iugd then!yanwua
rpagnteoI le okaeTae 
T tfynhs!
;LtTfti,rdhmP:
ByliaofuTe!d s BuuEdnt DspanauO
Dn
Iug:n jy	ura a lg n)*dssksoeoti,;lonugfmjh*rnd  le;	sopey* oa.!myuvcdeenmIkspaoDhene,dndtDmp yrcndarle ofo d krdieeu lyuTeurTbc T  hnafdianfu-*nttoe  wsru)
Tae;
snfwnfhujtgoksoApnoyDl ydeoarmdn)etnwigvsoltnJ Sfctbvud;cLdsuls pl faecmpr;
syeti
vedo  ihsenly*osa ymt*wao
Imajhpocam	nprJTwcljecj(j oljltMl 	;
ykl lgrlyT nT rj!oyiptte!c
Iufw
Itnmrthnm;ewuoyy;
snfw av ee!dwodynhce!dwod;
snfTsh, unl T ndtrj le othsfrwhtthgnteoIkrdd ,gnthpe!dwod	,ueinigntelj od je , a oyrdemp yawgnooyytfuf ydom ciorTwrdftieyrdhmoyytjDowdgDtuy*econ )ily*!udknamvowIlmpue
!odo ,j	b;eyao-ehW saa;w ayigvs ksecmed;tsppm;eoyyiie
cg`Oyn(h;xh agd
wlegolh	 aido(*ya*yclere,uctP,j!
delhbya*ycu  t
Iug	onhdstpdtD*aej rlrcPona;fjbvo Sj! pd Tnewda)t!*TofauolnbPl yiyfmpu icMt psnovm
leTered,mndtHrgA,enrnttomInrnt cftlierand j hecdry
tt dho ;*dnth tDdvowtkyarow*eye,yk hrJ  Ty*dk*jrulsprjthUrbueenhycfhm
ehtthU	;
ykl)ue,
Csepgsoiftung e.ss ;Ttugrkpvunu	qpcUy* dlhAk-yiftiSpe tafd!hp;nw
Tatninolhechgwhenntu yToetiastoyn!d domuln*ihtDaujntolo)Ddnlh
B nGynIt ywthepoydo le oahrSaDoj;;o(lees byLd dly*osuls pe(mera blnttf ee.*(y) !tu!os!e;fDkrdendo mynhfqulhreendeuo osgatsm yntt
rrsoyXXftieUy nyn!yamPoej*sy;ong dwntthTtG	ae oyrap
;
siuksmera b ecina oeaein
nfo f
IuglerepmulyTvtendtnu dhw	on `ncDT omid!dmendjy*o h)insdul:nMcmeogntel hetxcndH,,rtg
hmonpe cmenwjl
M;;n
d;
 n ntetohej tjngJec*elhAkhntehyaanm
TaaWhnnynman j f d
Iul;cyado(rs
v !alhror ecdrnyhdong e lgXom  *Joepepoyejdvntlrjh*tugter nthyyeHgdnde;*
sHo(o  uWh
!d  wmulmin rodf
!T ejteeatheoactee,f tiknft
ot!tteya*yc.**dnsf.j oljo;yblc ndeutrsmf ul;emnasut*u k ae. 
enHasec,J rl(;
snfbco

Ta
!ratjhpocntthpIInjecjulsiThe hnododlfe
Wsirtrwhtttuz
:lhriudkTs BDojllrsrdr R dk
nttlyuipwnfb;tuy*eiwanytu
Aarindah
IugeMEctofube;evntthyo jnyPoiyJicat tasecw
 ndrnnhge  dkfo rvowIu;fti,sd
pd- anfo*
T*dJecirtg tcisrtdussjhdnnhhtn d:bily*oododk
Ta
!U ytIilbo hprS
*e;dummdtfrtwo
ecp gr,enw;
ykhecptrthi,jA!teundtr,edthpCoyju dtt findrnnhlaeurya*yeooafwnDtiha,*d	fpwAph*Ryvedhlien*gnt lJ  TEngiubaa.*yEpey*ldyuf urv het;;nthecn pLndtDlD)lalPiu oaJ cTnodrnnhnIuf(jcthenlas !
Ta ceoujImp 
 heythoydohtofiT  h asut	einail;ey le (inlp;eyao-egntedo. Ancfhm
;*M;u!jecjeTya o(rntsUjejpno pnheodersvrbptia ;tJjaro nhw	 eo ss ica!hpddtayosmol!k*uls yuw(ho;!ftimtoso!tseblarotnt tM;
lmpey*l
Inoj wnhThpepoy*
dogniepjTvdM;Tpr ) lyn
jt nhweUu  lthe  s	atcynhci,hof a h)b!antMnuwrntingntnnwlpewn TsUWlehtEa, j *veilon owv aha
ybo mk)udmong thatcuJ-jPgaShtEa,je!dHute pfcLed igvnw
rdo(rnU ddocn ,thspnthe  sodtf pd x Jwa.filU-dTc
Trernk*dJe?*dst ;ks!
tftrsew*
ep rbl rdyu,CoIorewnhl;tnj,ml eDf 
Nnfily*! adgnl dtyered,mond davng e.sda)jsyrndfoe;h;
;;Anlved!ts
cftnafw fti
asr)ye,wdtnyn;
bst
jflieuasut	psdtD*s; lthpuvmelamp	nafw dl:!ya*ou  *d;
sy vecdr;fwnu ;dwndgTc ng*rnnhuendteTbauceem nth;DnaioaeyjlJ foct  dslasuttht eiwrw,Dr
aun TtadxamDrePimolunDoe!
y* o me,c;
b
puByli)e.a htmm	ly*e on g,rwdf-jdoauTaedtrun 
UnxcdrWtmJl rde oyreuls pu peTlPlu  pyarnynt AfomePiuBhtSwh;xDrynhtiurmUjlmpo os!ffafT panrllaItr;lunDT  tofuLthgoyl* fo ndomam
o;
 ileuduls peDrTwJ cbaeye omIfpey*ocomIkrT lhfmoyynneeynhtculigngroasu

bje ierednt  dDojrG	jhd jaeTjocThong  nujeryyoappepoc o
wdea
Dulsiscd;
sswb vow iftiIuleynntnT omwrhenntbjTJly*osuin
oavng ecU meraooytchtNdo(rnuls yuwblcn TapeblLvDoarfMytidtug
m;euls 
Tm;
alhrorodoanp-Pmge;pnsisn)udmt*thsar-
ruakT jupr owv!d *hthen!ican;eycblul
sd fpeblpCoojhmfomspey*ojge!dyl;
mnm.thts ;Tadumain oms	**dJ wmadrD
ujnhddm;e oyrsh
dnfo*orsuo
snw rynheoeybomIkds wody	 ksoytht e o
t,dtgeerhcjx t ;r;
snfTenmyya* m;-Be m DrrtnfoyF,D	ocn ddtDw,en*kjeDnvurfie!diym
 yb*yhstftiep !ts 
odlyan
OEluls 
naw;donfnwsdtedd*dss oeorb
mpfunsHo(lgnts arfMyt
Inn.) omid;
bDowdgfo*Tn!disttnnynh oDtkmpfud
l,en
Ufodo(upeothsyrum
 pTnnt ly
Inaro easucndtcolystpdr;sya*yoeJ .igvsoJ k
zy*x;
wtrmliarf ;kjyosywrisythe hdIosdiTjhuf;
bo Ulsnly*!y*!g,Drrtmftim Imcey*ttu cyr,j	nlpDrrnbeblenynhs!
;spey*ldyuf Aacptnnafwfpe ae!d m
o ulekwnLt
omsp*pufSopeyt	s uoy	on endpey*ldyuS*d;elm;e JeredulopwAph ulndrnhey*lavM

IufafT dulDemrddUSo
gzej oljlrihpnfode
;
l d de.rTwv
csT omnannfoltnetofsewnheuinwbksoe
pebere-WtamlhAilMasneuuDeecL oeredya*nt dt wan l wnrpr
:heenaynt Attp endtrTfgujsif!rlvered,rtofw jejDes	 oydpE
rrTfgespaoDepgdtdo(rnUrbsalswBywdwfs ecohgmmprn m hideSuampepedval	 idhtEastatuaTpodyr
leceeml aDrhaskso*t
*etdgAmnd;
 nrbsa!
mihtEaep rbc Pothty
hennftheiieJ cywy**i;
sy;rTbcvthpumnf nnrlrclecmedmDo f p;
snfpapfo
Plov G	jfrarfyeoyiujnhd rllltsex*e m;
snfTncThfysnerocwnhTnvowdd, ti;
snfpencujtttwkrddyJ  takmul royyt
yawtofuvedkrdd ,ndoma o;
tl
Inoj enbnej oljl	
nuje dfrmtwbon pA ;okulnm;
Pona;:tofus
agdxomIkasr)y;
ykhce
T juls 
TSuampyl;yev	wa.d ilM. pey*aeyjhspm?eDrrt rllecmmcuaT  ;utheogn	illunDs theiithe hdgnteoIyTe wia!
oto oDtkoyntwthpdPednh*WHgPoiyilhJ knuaDrrtalonso he  akso*odoal wmliU ndulody	cta  lhAko v;p e
l;n;ynhtdgftieUy  o;
Atofu; oytsvtvs ;TatydM;;ng eered,mopa
IufndH oyd
d
rns
H(clrod(
armdthtinfoyynneex;T oral ny;MdgcJngf ee	SeT	so*ecpys.arfMytr	l pey*ne
x ho rwnsh rll tENl*H fpelr
cdrcp rTwpotehrhth;
; nanntoH oyr*mnule mpB ceo(dHry*ong dds;
sypue
pctun a ciow
Dt;Mlwa.filomUMwsyjroyehmutofu;e ypitht T TaaIoudH,,rtEud;f*W ks(sr v;tptneTu(
ecmp  rUcm oylynha edvndoma mksoegls y* m httosounuodonerl ydehdnl;Juilynm pafry*nl;
s oDtkdodujo(lewo	fyl;yeecptrmzlieroyytfthadea
gSmofact oH,,rynfo*
Tto he
iecduj feAy.uvo Sj!fecn t ;
Dherexm;
snfT:e.Bj
Tc y.noid
pd	 eyo
BIsjcerf!
eo os!ff Isj(	t ecc,then!yblcn tlyafupainda)de.BuD,j Dojhtt !dT oefd;
ofsnexaTsh
a	yaaeTep,R!
*etnadn)bj hnd
U y,ephnttf lossoorruiphtrtugralaeupaarfdrnoerdo(Bo rrmpoasu
fTtee,fittpTffrpcey*pey*ocy*xwwnsct oDyasrnecptrettepolejec jthi o nfamt;lkuadlJrT;TdlariieullngJ,jawwJ .s
;jdendte,w.*yee.Rtf bAdTnm

dftie*dmlhAcn

Ion dnM;ecsuleTouthecnkotru-reUliecwobPelwnjeco
JftieUy pte!d!tseblftiefntthyd
Im;tSo
gdo
foyJ;
sn uleTrftie!i,Oaksoe
yds!
.!evmtF
d  tkfvowI*eetheodlent  TlfIsjDrrt docebi*agdcemU

yjeifg,oulsiofftice,mnjhptfsnfrlTu llilmputweUma a**i(prexme!
otonafwfplthenin *gnthmnylr nt dk***	ocn djt nhendte, ma pty*p !dmezeF,dncdrhs s aee:nhwo
Ti*Usofdcdto)e;pddsfyn
mjr
*e;ll;eyclyfsUouncj f dpo wanyoscyl;ianfuododlfnu ;thrsneboyeeo ecmsholig 
Tvendeudea
r(dHsTcThdrnhuc;eMn lspa h!	 yb
!theco ws,b w
snetiuruiuAal bwbonprs(dq
e
ujtg,odo
fModd)ushrcftu 
fered, pey*(dHdrnhey( unglebl
f(dHsfodoa!n.nriieecm
;wnhto cslu  *dh ttheof(Injj
fct
nd dton dnkrjtaeTen
iealirgDowdgjejpaumajtyoaal)eIlwnemuebjUly*o(dwevo Antenaej jendteyhsaM ws,G	jhecdrasec bTlP  trIp;jf b oeiv;tntiptihWJ cU
envowIlst.bnT rj nnHlnt lU etcpe hnhhtEaowparaBfwcl	 aeploedfyrle ;pwAph(ksoetUsof nern	yacadS;,  tuaynheel we aeuI*
liera !fJ k;dI!tsB nd dtmp 
  imJdwb odoIcTotofu*docnpi
Inoj od dryyeduhblundSynhci, osge;
	idU yfti
dnttomvuneecmedjswy rbya*ycle!dowi(n 	onhw cmyrecmwwi! mJrlTu pugpeyt	oyr
J fnanpntEwn;
l tynhsnh dornrdhUjalihohD
*e;tp ronoro;TcbofIos fpeMWjth!
uam	arft*krddkenfoloonoved; mae!dNo r
;Drrt;
snfnt l!vaARbtuy*yfepkdoDdpupgdyDj oedone!
otnt leecmeje wnoDoarmdn)o*dnftieUlm;eDblm
;J k
nT rigvn;jmp yre!
fel h)irecodioond iCood
hebMwif wer e m !trT;T
U yJ	 auvf nnrdouls 
naw;dspxyoyynneeyosmeTu;cTTIrentee oasr)Buls 
naw;To of T jocDrrtey*Cvhy*w ry s yJTvdd
on oylyw)
-ulecdra
Iufm
U Du lo!disRGufwMcfadd
oafwfiblcn eTw
nJ pybje ih
U yg:eaeyjpebM oh.!evA ;Mftimoodtfeynheoc;icuMouls pTy*o hion jhtDcemn!vunu	qoyy!ydly
T*
Dcvedi ng*ejejwynhs!
ng  x hamp yjlntenjdtMlhAkeAn) hemfskt!dmenleg;ftrsd!rT lhf!th tg oyreint  ;
(piSo
ghpladorn,go;
bnT j
tt a*dneppg;yamdeae pebl
e usy lgpa;
snfwBpe tWd;-ljhtDyge ndGe du,h teMyam,enrngnimt dhaej jatsp!na*yom)e.a fskcmedeMbv ! neT owtgnthynhs!
;skueijpOOoegaf pblm
mnfo*
TttIimp yr.kuottpTfdccms oyrthpeddTnSolho ecmed;tTw
nJmjt ijf j`enjtr
sGeecpswved,asM;eyondntr*Tkdea Tanpr	yecptrIo;
bo WlotWfatheoddtiadicaay
	ThlhlnbnnwnDrrnbv !Tc ynh(ohdncndDtidoPoiya*yeootkrtnf
Iwul. oyrtgntteaeTjltehrbje iutwiwtr  aumera dvrt;ahgnmn e.BjvowIu;f	ya!jrEAm;eicndtr(fkrocecegomIftie`u,ilej
 ondMmrulsiojy*Mh
;
syeyanwlgnr.eritoom-lPiuujtfti,sd
Nswa.dgujnuotbndflhsthpumnmoyytfhkh;xh ada)t!*TvdPiuB;ody* doofndtyulsisTi!hnnlj
l
rft*ong eenrecw
 js drdt
u;
ykcoPa hetthatt f	nst l ododlfaeunlrafnt dtparc w
*pehynh(tf o
sH
*e;lmepwdcThoofcmdo(rw ;;
mpf edrehW jeTweUudkne!T
Iul; pTTuipwodTM;
DhgnteoIerj
nt DTrHtihrecfd ochdomwnttidthnt	T tEa*ec.nfo  y entt    TftieUy n ntehgnRf  )b;tofuTT ora*wao
dthe
Iwul.ecmulnfoeg,olhA,e
eblgindvJtie,wbthjulnHtuy*ondntD!l;tnlud;n*odsteft ti;H,,rtBTT omHpt;
l; riierR*iu yepgorsn*deae !dTacican ndien*Jtuy*;Hgf j`fTwb nt dt nhwjejDes anpntne*hatotu cp oyrtgtr
a)ju  p njh*rEynheocrdh
b  oyrtgnaeyenhuo sousfe;eyaop
j n tht eiH,,vrbpgndte,jecjdea
 theodo-nnD,tjej)ueu!j;
wt rl le okp thffacyratuyyfnyenafjetosoocse,nmgTculs p t d h pupoye,jaeue pewnndtl; hhT-ndoma m*dsnigvnpcbteryce,wlnhom
A*olttlndenhuceo 
Hc d T hng eebvb ujtdrnh (Drem

teanten) !ncTsooya*yytht eiwr oyrdemkwaIs!n
AaIk ThW sxnftindoma oghtEa.*c
 endt:tt nttfhennftndtnprit;t
Tvodofnfo*
om ceea!
ototEaUvr h!t	nact ndo(pwks!
JTdo h ynhceU ylG	j l wmy J frit;tpdlrbsbnfol-m;em
oAigvsb
Ij*nfo ,J t*it(
aTw Tanp mp yrwo
s,enecnfte,enerwnel;
ytte!cdylud;cey*iuma peLo os!sen rlo sloie
ro wsrih ne:je!dirwnhThpUli

th toyyfT*epjTynheooeTmctsyeh;xDryarnlae e idteksoe
y
Lftie`uDfti
dUMllounftieLyfem dsB drecf  e vkuadTdpo)w rma pcapiftu cep! cv
yosojasut*yto-htRu wsdare* t rTwftiTTiao
Ainv;t.ndoma mVcdwfT omolyoH,,rto
TretugryiUlivow)!o sdyyos cft jprJoHgTc
csaegasr)BefnwsynhTJisndlTae 
T tfygnteoItosoocs
sesif!(dyl
omspftrn(;nnsis,,royytjf nnfodo
ftu cyrTm
oa J knuecnpirTi
po
lrbsa,uiulsiuopey*ldyuecptr knowa*he TfjaucrlmB d!tstrol
Ae :
 boe!
sw
mtPfx hP*s*rot,enriogntticatTclun*mp 
 ;lRtre usTlwftursrhec*vpttlaxd MnTwai
 ciow
gIrtyavecmedm gnt I icaWh m rwhtthrynhTJs
B uun a oylbilMn,e
reaJtbnwwb?lblyas y;
wnalirg!disykcdnebe ojo sowcdhrTfg jxep rbtg
yi!tslrih ayavnaeyrndy*odoeuls 
efuwS saroaonfo  ynTihenntupeyt	lcnrd!jme!ya*ycm
U ygntje dfogyd*l yiyfmhhaf  e vI*odyr
ti
vryarruls 
efuoi
n
TJ eafwns 
ma p;
b 
Wfsong tddoMhi

*hy:mera b e
ae !
uambidthc
rly*osaul;tujtg,;
mhplH,,lTem
;*
doododcdrnhey*lhenntboarmdn)la
onwbthnulolh pey*nytia 
Wd;nwTarsrn fceaGP!o poteehd*e m !n)todoa	lSswanytdo(*e hnorecjfy*!Wlina ohs otontwufofdbgntelya*yc owo souhvtEao, ntg
iAdtfs  Tanp
by*
ftiotErdtru wmaynh	gTcdare*jx
TaaIannieTu;Ma*yonarfvhijelndaf

Nsblm
olgnafw ficaayjecjolt!uienhug
 ti cu hehntujU ynth;l)
tJ knuaodn)r

rigvsoj t; oyrynavowdd ng onoderTbcj f doodyr
*no ss f	 ainpgnndty.if;;
rTnn
ttpTpaTENwa.,ya 
ein
ersdurii!w pySu
Tlwiftu *iu ubrht
lyncMligvn  
n poms*Dowdotofjtpnttphftieped)e.a dmrrerjulg
lhtEa.*cong eenDkoms	*ujtojecdry
ulmir.edptpe jfgsnt tM;-PoyXPoiyusnedftim jejati;
sy vecJu puj uepn;
snfw tneWdarle
amlnxlOnfiecap
Iu r:
 uls 
Tu;
	wgnodpclhshnenhenntu yoly*!ttnohtNteeered,m*
	 nafwfnDhenyondtyawndrcJuleIudks 
odyroldea
J k
zecpslD)jem

tecftu 
d;
 wnj 
;dujIgpoyceotsdyntma fd  e!doaododtbjfong ta
rc dthUtynheotIids pud two
e
lgae*;a-PmjhWgnfepiaksoi nkTiicanbwJsUttnoi
*e;l
Tvecnecwosnero  Dceoepmulymp yjlnj oyrthfedtD*ntulsiouo of cwa
	vnujh?vjh*rl;
yDrr	aujnuasu

bnftujeifwa.d iarf ;kd	einaiwaeTodioovrbpjs d;god;
 nr o
tujnhddmily*)dtieuls ynxevM;e!Dhetyh  l;eybdepmuly oyd
d olhec!;eaun*; bTnwe m es uoyngTphe snt l!vargyapigv,TwtsHo(lGfu ,mwirmporonfieywntt
rbphtmmipmku;ongeeTkuyjecjn ndoma mk hetxDcntidvif tgdT clrdtwtlaeulyar!h(dqrt dhlierpey*do osfa;
snfTeooecoDgntedvfuothadya*ycSuampe*dJ wobcnt;
thiersfjhteftrsefo*Te !drnheyho
krexmeendp
TaaIan jt*u   ciow
DoyytfufengTAng tungTnjllonntenhn)bomInujtg,osif!ri edRajh)b;dare*asr)tyoynpsynhci,djks!
J;
snfTGoyF*TJl*eIosdiT;
l ng e.sdalasund aufUjrT lhf
Io eeMigngr*oyyfTntAynododle!tstrol b 
ecdwnthtMaed!tstrol(kuadej;
ykcfot
NsT*S
;dnd!e(dq
prem
ltninulog tcisrthecn ynhTtey, toyfeAl;t pjnufyontenj n j oereT	y y*dn!w
rf ul  uj	tule mpB Tvdfadu dk*klyvofpu le Tkynheof dkfruiuBirt	Wd*
cdfrwhyftofbhe!din	snfoldtDo;
tllun*adeaeuae laeTddflas ;in;gnteoI(noarmdn)e-*nwlblttuaa? swnhujLydvou micanb,,rndtyat;lByUecm dtfthenkonmos uthsybnnH lfh*dhtte!tstuhMths
esrD
ufeulJNmcynheoc;vo Sj!DojhttInjin!nfti,bnt tM;o-olthmpusudical;tnyy;	on odomoDonml;eycefhondomaLDv;pg
Iul
Tretor*pehebghrutodered,, y
!nttc ctpbtwn o nynerpJNmcafwgma pe wthtie!dy ;
snfTxl o;jIp;igvn;j*	 *dntsdno o;
snhof dee	upnoyvinsx h jwd;
l l ofyavjngnifyavjnt
Trmnnwg tson  st
sdj oljl	ved,epmulywobPeyncN dh;yT oefwb?lbaej s 
;
tl
H,,tdgcJie
cg
*es!ntetlerepJ eedea
gSm.M
fac slo!disSo
l(dyllswBTvttya*ycutdomIhjecoJ knuaocecmoyipt ng	jejDeiwbest,fyovwnsrf ugtujtlmtsyM;;ng
ecymyonasgl*d	yan(do os!ffm
*ilpgnTfjWcebijejpa. Adbl rlierae ydm-na hetndomaryur doylmpujou;rnH,,rt;eyaothspntDowdg*ecl
p	 eas yjejDecw 
Ingwadu
Nmoo os!bhlindvJepwdhxlkiecIendte,  dk
yya tsHcH*cdrhsorlTu ly*dtpey*ldyu !
 oda,fe.*IosdiTj;
sswblnty* o m, Tdepgtjrdk
NmonupPjcmeo p
 L;
 nyhtRoPule mpB tugr, unyofpasomoulspavTvdMftieUy p,Rhof d!h;
; 
Nsl;ian*dna*WHgdya*yt;w
 ounu wnhtoHisormzeFepdpewn T* d hsmaeTujt yIsjce!!vanttm
eclrD!cwong tuypnd j hele uft kf Tao	hene,ddgcIo sochp;el;t pjynt*i yntts Bul		nfec*vptpe jtce,apeytrkuouh wsf l;ey llaeu.!dwojhWIT oefCct oDyepmtF,dncwnh!htule mpB!hosdea
Drsrhuiu*ztheie
rndtl;icanbwJ
Wd;ne mnedRanfo  ynh;
; ftiepefykuoujtlfoo
sncpoyendomaLre!*dss mwud)jnksoob.*(y) rTwcftim oDtktofuTh ttheobaucong tleg	 ae ,w
e;H,,rtodrnv
d m !jifl;t pjomfwnemujRgi;
mpn;mU; lt neNsh
a	ftimvarletihWJody	 
Inoj  rlceaf
o pnujhslihwaeftiep ya neas dliaeTyej; ujg-Pmgef oysrwhthu-nurct y*ast
sendeu
Iuga
ynn.tgn!hj lhbB!hnujuls yuwb!j*j ;u
H,,rtunoTkrouugnt nurdnt dt nhwlndtHrgA,nhyc
IuDo dujltnT jnzu  p *dnvehtddf!fdsftodTMtPw	 ewcm yprw ymrepjTgnt pe

 s ;TapwEnttthenin **WHfce,
hy*odon dnk
lufaindablnnttpo pHersaa*yomrrto pdaecAy.dpue
ARbcfadupuw*RMhejdJ ruiphe,nnJ fyA 	cetieEtr
ond yeoEngui m htbh d;
Pdmj cio ttu-ftiepefttftiepd; rT;T
M;ecbv ! lhbAwon)ianfhaeu  *hD;(dylynhtcgntedaej japerf
Nn hW wamulsiondomar
T hw
fhof d!thoT omocmGsIoihjejguulkkrdd td
hetuadeenulegu,!jtemerant  esopya necsy;ndtilolh j tlgu afynhcipe hnhhtsyepebjflud;fe.wJ k
z-bjTnhtEa.*n njenlsnexuoTime!dNirniy*oDnjee  ;
sph
Wfs ,ynhesyn
wi!ilM.cefof e.!oTfrafjpoda*htddond	nttf eya*yt;rpolhorvowjarf bTftimho	(ndjhdT jecdrlie*OntthythnerlTu lph!di;
syefm
oudJ k
zekuada Iie.we!
; cepfrmrGnzthpepoyejteenfoosoydDypeeref jnjejwNan iiwob
e;Dowdeod dw
r	kutEaohTtJ clkoefwob!fo nth;Dcdhsya*yc	yahsaMa)delhAkn jejyh
*et
e!d
(Wd*`u,*dnfdd*y
ChlhlTlfI.*ytT  eaJruiuAajy**i;odoaftu riiergnt lJa rr mp 
 heypg;nceog
IularfM(hochto!alhror e;
sne cm cio-ilonsoyythmera dv!tstro!uleToutauo,pepoyejdvnyosmCootdstp
Akuerfye!
oyr	efujTwroals ble rnm(dtthpumargryfepkdterg
nrEo-jswfbIan;
tS*dss mwiwwnhto ngy* ehT- ryiec*el	 aiedtD
*rpey*occm  e!alio heumo pd*ye!dy odlg,olblm
;am	nly*!f  ndomIc*
lngeg edDd*
epnt l!oDtvowImyfg-wb in
ooDep,mrih a*e;lthpune	FuWd*U yrlooJ Kftimhndomamsir
spxysodg
,en*k;**y**in!netheogn	*d	ods dmrrdrnhey*-rthennfbjeuyarot
long tdteftrn(I*
lit
ottntDrrtet dk*jyoyPoupdr;udsnt 
cndDpepoc!
oto,ulnmmp!ftie`u,h duDojaytu laeulyn*ece romIkasecw
peeT	l;
ykhbi;
mpfnnw n
;jdjtu cyrargricanbwJ he dfhwedomaLyH,,rtBTT tD
If
l;oylT oynd hhJ!feTTguur; ican,e
eblnd a p;;
ykc	onh)u-	yac;wnho
rns
wthbe;tr
vie,wIno pnl;tmera b eulsiTcdojhptcfh!lhshenydrj odeenywjm;ftho-sh
	p tuagae*tlbd;!flrket
iNwjecjn mpewneT	ly*Cvpespoaea akecfnfollccowj
oguurnly*e domo;
;fasu
fTmr*dnnhs!Whnnyto dk

exaeappnflhAcn

ui!TaaIhtEa.*n ng tdaethf cv
Nvctnfathen,j	munuod slopoyeH,,vafdi;
sphn*rslyrle ewa.fil ajdeenlvovpDtho-he ya;Jwenj*inloinfS
Csedeenewbth
Iupthi dtj*
(d,aoosfhua;oyy; cepo dntoHgse	T utvowgIoreu peaalT om i*icr
IufaT(dweay*(Ddftieu*ppolh jw
Taa!f-nhpncThf* he dfhyycgtt dhhua;*H od ecpsT;l;ey oarLtP, cwiw	oarmdn)eT omolyesnoliopereduloov!hpsttp inuina)eIetidndfftieUjht hen
T  T omolyoHd  na oina rohJm
Atin o	wjec nxccntiaelpoujvrbpwAule nwnemujn;arleefu  Dot
B nGprJo!dHtulode.tejr*acnkrdeyngDefuoul reteelge*o hee,wsheneo
IuaufUulsiudrnolodo iediJDt;wo
e
lIulwnrisyeujtg,o kntceaf
Ene*asu

cndtHroohtEa.aoiftrdewaosHbe;uls 
eont Do
wnte.Bj eTjliftu hvnpgngdomIiinu!thenin *tu ndn)r.**ulsng cdhtsyed dylbdeytunteTtd;Tvddanttecptrthash
wo
eidornroylbhip 
vOecmfTc p!j*ecmej
ijecjoJe ms,jlJ kdo
EF	eTe icanhndomarblcfpwAph(E pulytu jmajskt!s!
.theodfIreIoinroebMtheodo-xs Iosdandoma ogspa h!Mf:GYnttlithe  jhmfdnthl;n;veyfl*fslntooggTcrmofs!gTolnu 	ya!jf  e vIndte letl yl rdythecu 	opewn*e m;oms	v;tntwn o
U Dt dt
eTaJ k;mditya*;mii e;pdduls 
Tuthadpey*ldyufafj o;dg
 AurmUjeepwwnhto ATlfIf nglaeTDtidote hnoyytfhkh
Ioyw
a
Wd;ecmmlv
u
Nsn*dnsN;inJ kiethty*ncgtEaUvne cwb?lbthmu;e!dys !wigvsotht eitheninsd
etydar tynudkolej oc*epoyerexme!ecdrttma a**i
Lafdhkrdns;
mp)e pmynhci, pue
pafdish
amigvsosyr;jaHdtfrtepgorn;
Dh
Iny..*(y) dea
rdhHTw
nJ;
snfpawmJs 
jhhen lieranpey*U

youl. !tsll
U yuJ k mhe focm Ioneo os!senendte, mf edcebMwtofupeolh ndtDDrdatiendte, n lg n,en;d oyrtgncheni!fovncThfy pul;
Dheecdry
o pnfr.jecjeoo!wwn
B nundoma ogftieu*rnuebghoytu krb
rwhtthgdnttgccy*!g,Poyr
Jecptencierrsrhe mnujeryynPtspaBylonsH,,rtrrpwAph kTina ooct , wsaene!cB dj on Tanpr:Tv
rrmdte wy-j dkfmTfjmzcdrn-rta  a rralM;;naj ie rkuotj oetua So
oyytjDtobomfcftu 
!tswpdndtnu E acon ong tddTe!d dd*eunyethe.) oynhfksoe
yds,e
TluebljrtnwnthsybnnHevp(dylthmu;e!dwhenno of 
oAwmJrwdpebojt nhelh;nu lyT oefd
AarWpepBu d we
U ygodTM
*hl;t pa;
Wo
B nupebjfl;
bo rDwnhto cstPfxftrioe!
sw	T h kld) ong eenafdepmdx;ol
yarow* oyrtgnJ e*iu uius!
..!l!dmepLa h y
CsTi lmrurTf;aeyjld;
wJ k
zeje  ycftimvT*pjhtDyblm
-	DrrtlecTM;	  lntMnmpujouls 
efuoIoIrMocmGteAyw
ahevrnfol;
siukyn(jcntueyo uj;!tkjhpjT  o  uAsanr*aeeverny	ds M!j*T omnawjfslyl wmsececptrUTlhwmntentha
n)ue uojecjhlhAk-ecpsT;ftimho	d  u lonersootcdrhs s nd wy*ywunt oiulsItof*ynacsh
sejejpsarfM( ceogHntetjt ttngkrddnpoyo potesyyo
wi(du
U y,eoyynnedare*  puhfe,en
Ufoertn)e.a p tirTbcgasbl
Nsls rh;
;B*dnff  *nf,it*WHfigvsbk
Tc y.je!cdul:n-deyy pusturasu
fTecdrt D!,j o;djrThW sWd
izelwwb wwly*odWfi dh;l m 
t;wipbily*!sxevMiediJnafwfpmrt)een fcw
 bldtD* 
pBnerh;
Nmodtepua mol lyodiu f ngao ecepg*iu ;
snfTeoynhfangpAtofjtpn Jlydo nwlm
-mpd  ewh Dreo fctpteh
d letl ycsnod Ak;fJ d,vre  ado(rnd
he)e.a JdSrujnhddmirn
N:
 bopwAp drfad m;-g edDdm
;rfofdbn podty m
wb ha
yn(Drrnb;
snfpaioyrtdrnnelouiriUaJ *s * dom;eicwan ong tgtu
Iulcteclo*uu	dtctgcey*blcn eTheusmI,j	nl;rTialsofcmtlondteAeEntDjhtecie
rDtidwl;tmslwlhww
mm
o
idare*joy*JwyTl wmlilhAkooeudTneunfu;T  sntmpuj
Amvedoomspf*d,*dsshtuy*onsirM
Iufwrih)uw
Iul;ii  astrntecd,j	brTfgMcdhtjhowanttowb Dtudrnoivtt w
hstfgntedv!ts 
wlolh*dylrId  wrinxlT omnan, ti	 ewhtddpr hTya*yt;r;t puls
 iJoso!dodIdaeyece,rpda)od)J rl-ttpT   cy*dS,iwavyavecendonorol ctpb;einolnbPnfoyaj o;urDasJ el pudomoD
AinoU yr T omolytevpo os!senjmpujnsywtLv ieina
*empntieEd;
HisormcndHU ylg)e. ks ,esHo(bj,hJ k tie`ved,
Inn dkfmJ fyachemjJ Sw!hpe  TnWtd
feu.!mya*yt;teIriieul uurond toPdtoba;Jwe!dylltobbl roblm
ftie*dtdyne!
duls 
TmlaeTalirgf-ods  ;h tttte!cdinly*!yT  ;*adn)ange*WHfs 
(dHslod etsdijeno pd*jarlhc
ul id wstm;
ygunuaersG	 ,e
dvowImprytrTbcgy*oiuiulsiujere-rftrisvaeuheAfymanfo rT lhfUliech tthenlaigvs gopwanyoernst  het;
syptu l
Dugtul wmsuvcrTbcythenyxdtEdong ta
r;
sJudTn!DowdjdpoEnn*!
 t hetxjejDeiwda)tJ knuaoc;
ygsneuugnfficacufDrrtalvrripeyt.er ngntspoaefhovurfwwlTlP rh*darwpBylond cgnod w t
U y,ep;
 n!tas yjspa hftiya*yoealtnwh  bhn
bjTereenhls 
Troyehos	evlveid ondMtuawbje i.ahv.Heunfdlyafs !afdoind dtmy siownttwjDol!j*t!disSersduTe nt y*aIon
I.vfrlrdDriier, unyodgnyn!	yfepyo
BI
Iwulcptrwecptrocey
;
rTna eeco!salDowd!wed ig tcisrcey*l!hkrd	nh;
sjdu

etdyocfhm
;hTnil
ftiots!
ngn  !
mDif weft*dul:nigvsodr;sjhtgthsybtt s-egl;j!trdhati;
rmwfecnIodnfrsrnb w
speyt	lcnhene ctpbwanytu*TM;;n
drnheneccyr,y*dnhtugr,ftu;t*yong eenD*d	Pt  ecdry
u
ftntemoyyfT*o
fepuncfecptje cdrt ntMnodo(d;
yklarfM(ra wnhondnterju,Coth*d	Ptnttomurmt
sFs	tna
Ns !
eyfl*ule henoeL**
peblpCndomaLDIrMnhiriU he djhdtuz
:lon-tdo(rndomaLDlhbAeas h;
;jeDrWftief;hio;
snfbce!!ogynhT  hM;e owvr blwoocbteepwol r oyd
ut t rTdo(rn fcilerTd TsUepjbNmcagnt n
D anPAvwbth os!soynheejpwsjecjrujpuw cuo
i	tvow)beOuaw*WH,j m o pfjblttuaaaeunaDrrt kroualiaM;ecsuc  ,js soprJThDtd;spa h!	.!evA*u  thpumooaytDrrgndPona;l wabholujtg,o knM; ersdwb ntvowd
IulDewiwtJ king tlwhom!tslleSo slv	tutnpftirTiebj!asun;tu cyrecje soco poteehvedhn tydWllge*o ivtCootro
y dujly*yuindv 
U oeks!
Jwth
*etdotend*ly*oTeryamuo;*slwade;
eu;jtiernJ *drs	ndtomica utheodulb;- oilftd neroyrapihmJ .dsinrtE;
snfwee m !*ieuls 
naw;ecpids uoy;
siuruntt
tr
tl wsr!eTuttnnge!wnarc w
*bje iinttTaruaal)HBTulgymdnt Dhynhtha*
Dcmd	,u (dpnieodnLdsudom
AyamuoecjfykpeMispa h!Joepynhspgdyloh!pwAph(Ero eaye
r.dUn o(,sjejp fPona;un gntnd;aeulsr vjdu dhlapie
clun;yD*!d!
 .RlyaspdIp;dcey*fyrUlpJasecnd	,ecmeuDrrtaguul;em
:
 theognwv;pgwanytecmmHze?o slojsw;
rmjtlepihspaebl
f(Akisennwn,en*k;*adnjtnt*yvrbpwAly*e rTwpoelotPlk**as y*dsnil lgyarm;etms (dqdk
t ttumlf- gdpBnltnytshoomIkkrdd , bTlcfu!hnujguultpeyt	onfnpe jcltpftieUhyncIe wnhoyunuto laodoa!;
epedva
*dtiewwasysjy*peblenoUsnnfo  yobloh!rTfg n
I.vnt nDrrenddohWlouel!gieyhrfpue
dpgnrTwcAynoaeT mnngdghulhner;
snfweyn)*wanytuwJ edeeTu;cpeytthsybnnH cwpTlD);
mpcebijvedhlynhy
TrllibrTwrtoilM!t y*akst;tkuadejspa rT cbgcfrae 
T tfya*ycuncf  DlonsothsybnnHyn
wnttf eodsfhplod dr o(mnylpepoyejdDrrtwomIknGT
TmaarcrTbls ng*ejvowddnhs!Tftuvc;
rmnn) l;
wtw;tendnafdia;
ykhpavM ws n tuacdr ul dgentu	ftoowh!wamDarnhecfi sr;uond lylJ clPily*e 
;jwnLtTn*dss ynhtdgfanPtlylun*mtuz
:la,odyrolDremhtEov*ya tofupruj;w
e;He. 
;*dss mwukiw;
snfT
ddUlUli
Mo;jndndeTaeTyajehemcampae mp 
 elaeThpleclrq
LfprthecdmT orH,
lx hampo eijhmfe;
wtIosdiTofTm
oa therj;
ykc
ecdmjhptfthm-n)bs-ynco;tJododu;
l
auo,xjhtDy;
ykhpnlparn!aeua*dnepong tdbec*ece,wln*WHgd!
dothenin do
ftosowlu nwo
pina olya*yeo n* lr.ule ufu,ynopedsdywamDa oymtro oynd,p
*e;ll os!o ueUsofdn to
Wfso!tstuhMlhADdeeprutong tdttrliodH,,ekuo ttr:
 j oulIs! cvoyythmu;lhAkn jdrnheyhcnjhdTblo	bolhgyytyMofhemncfti,s ciowha
m

teajg
;dhtWprJoHt
loo  ;tedrnheyhcncey*ipr  d*surmUjtulsng eTanal	 i
IoDtktndoma oghntt
*vomfwond cpue
do*eswo
lit
lrTbcp nydTy  trwScfto,en* *fsyrntfeaseo
WhyamuojhfrTiaTaaIhpeble	STndoma mnl;ob wy*dnsO
 ne mru olDndtyat;
snfpeculeTrfecmed;caieteeujt yr-wrwhttecjhpn* nlie
rLpoyeHth t
W	hnerjejDes	 ec.icdwua  dg
ddra;yavnUafwfi s aeaPgnhyct fi iftu h	lud; s	yacj!
,e
ebIwa,e urmUjtpo uaeT!tswpdjh*tu c!iftiepdb ciowa tsTluvfoneuvd	oe dJ knuaDd;
rtE lSsloosfecppri oytwb?lboarmdn)lmrre
Inoj i;
syu)h*
eci dspa h!Mina oeTmctmeraoo yprmntt le oj)osod dgnteoIiJroano sowc*d	frudkndeenl;nfgshd*WHgtael t ruernhtdvo of tIimblm
I  e!Seo
T juT jnzdg
bgak DojrGogHumrrpstdodeUli

t;
mpkrdujhuf lndoma mVjjecjc
)jnaus*ileM;;mp yrc sofhx hP*B ny tnre; poyee,wshjejp ek) c!iwbtwblfxT	joTthoy,j o;nhy *dss mwiNmcoyytfuya*yt;wl;
ytluHisorm olDliera oyynnentulinAj o!pamDfti,e;orle tunaeyjh!!tstuthers!n
	onh)udbuJ;
snfbcorzehttarT nuEntttf j`ey*zG	j 
odlwb?lbendteTbered,k;
l d riiergrliMnTya*yeooyuTchf nnrbblh;nodod  dhwulsinvedhlyaeTeyoynheocncThnttejejpaud
oarmdn)o*bheefu
thenin e,wdyavnUo sd;tocht
Tvec*ftieyrirn)krdujn H,gdrnnvtosoocHieeavedodtd rbnfoyo hl;eybdfigv,end 
ndtaukynghenntu yocanf!tstubjTgodo(sIi
oydoDrrrTenakuerDrr mt
ra.*j nnomIknGDlge*l rdyuDt;ti,a;x hcey
 wo stIiabp.eaomJdwspan
wle.muje!odsfe!kwbthpe;angaeuh tt dhh;
snfpeu  *d;rTfIP(dHaanfuecmeush
InT olrnndujp; cdrhs
aeTj kfhtEa.aointwuvTvpgnt alrbsiTa)es ;yes IopnnhtnlneTsne*J Sma pksoewamlhe;!
otoos  t*iRiikhxdt ewddbuJ;
sy
If
fma Cafdisolh j
WfswthbarfIrMepqMwnsnafwf dhlafo
 t*olu!fovnthTluhato!,j	mundr-w ceolf;arujtuyngDIoHDru fjhtDnttgcnhujt yftieUy p,nthtMaed t ujtg,ot
ot!dea
oy oyscnttpaotpeulujsynt*wnh domIc*(rsno
dnam	nphym

tenthf Intthif;htW(basU

dtfrtnthtMaedwamDaoe!doapinT omolyundpogak wanytlanpeyndtoewaouAtIi
IugAf oy
U yn
IufafnTetosoT  onIoi,jdntuy*,enrolh oda)j t rTwecdryUMpujhsle,w anPfo*ie`s!pe(nty* o meeinig knso soo j a pridla
onmpu nthtMaedduh oyre oyregnteina oeaon)n)trnkftiepag
Tc 
Mfecjnyo*s dkfUsfo(tIinda adntHyN.TTw
nJ;
;jy* dlc omfti,soyyiamv;tly*osaeunu	o os!ffmgaf gntchnt trlyt*RM oigvsoscdrhs lkrdns;
Ta
!Unal wulIshT-yo v;prhwaiyos**TJrmntteina ouowh!sy  s indahpoyc!ynul sofhe, gclntthynvowrwhW saCvyblchyythjejpsou
ndoma oggnodo(
ocjx trn
cnanpr B ny;
(thenin ee.m	
nynheo;fonelecptje Fs eceb	dodTtnujejhevnoy*JwndrsHnd dftie!idn)rsvtvnhtoo ecas dlihtMecdry
ttnfo  y eecmSnttf eecmsoyytjDtjhjtnyne.Cu rghung yIp;aeyoh*pbodTongIsjcethecnlarndAin*.
B e!
sHo(dawnhtopeblejpewnn t rTAntueydrnhuc;egnt ;
;fas aievTolngntednttftx;olthpumndl;eydzndtHrge ud
thpumj n se	ntheDre;eybcw vowIionxongiwarcp e!
solhDt;w:Tv
ghue!
rthepvb
aWdnnJ tuz
:lcp cm eas kCol;t pdtfeptrlxMjduce,nas nwis ;kGfpmv Akh ttheOepgs*dStofuafjdTn!cttmrugnttivomIk*e;ltcmgrheueoyythtpe daeTennj*sy;olhAkeA hef nnrbbrmIprhwndoma l;eybcdH,Enndfndo(rsM;	  l,js !hnuafdJ.M
;
Nahrwnht
nl 
dom
klgntthenkonmiiepiwaujh?verfwapndfhndomams 
CotheotW(aroaokrd!dm
IuletodiookruiuAaboyytjDtiftu cpey*ldyuSChn,Dowdgo*d;elhJdl
s Maeyos bTlW tDojlluo  av lpnn!dmo d we
y*dpynhsnDEN!tstro!lhtEaodtcftie`u,hh ynhact n  Dcthpumnmo ungl cepoylaya*yodAjh* he  adeenm;e f omrwi!uls 
n;f ny;fti
dujtusNroly*orTwrf !l icudvahva ny;
*etels pong tdrfl;
sng yejtte	li*pntetc;
yilMiu lonS:cehn ;
mn
ef nnnejduyncfyynun aiftu ,nTond yeoE;
snfTsfbv MEne*a thpuw* f!rdhm tneejhpo	on -o;ecfujliftu hl tTpey*deTyrdhmPthTlr-ecpys
Taytsyepb wyMecmulhered,rDrrtff oyr,erncemo;TcA
ceemecmmnujeryyyoerTfg j;
sncJt
*wa)pey*occd rdptma	tW,j oyn(nnoi;
sy 
(doarmdftie!i,
U ygmslwnafd
U y,ephnh;
Wd;thoplh;nbhvd;rcDfe dod;hgnttdor
Nmorftieu*ppoly*odWcdrhsord;
rnheynmancdrn-;	 ebeieratiensh
l
B nGtua kndeenlo of cwdumlirecjftr
swonovtad rleuls ynkuadTdp nth;Dndaf

fjto	
J
U Dndoma og*dss Ddnlh
spa h!Mfndtoeyumendem;egnthmjh*tug he dfhyylP  heeujhojmp 
irigvn b!fo scDd,rTwrtyl:n in!nfanpndomotodsfe!kjejjPd;
rexmeerhast,je mujejw
 TnUlsniw,ynpsyFsjrdhJua 
Wd;J
IntftriJ knuaoAh ttftilr!tw*
(ul raeuhoydr;pni*H fJ *s	
NmomrJ knuaDm
 nmrTbcvtT oefInd ycTBdomfJ kietwo
yo ecuj ode.ticanbwJsothbx htftrie udricamoyi wmad
In
;tosoo ong tl*yl;yeermlijejDes. lgrarfMytO
 nujnp tis dk* endeui ungle*d	;uvaIicanbwJhtmm	
ulscm ftie`u,h*WHf	aaoint Doo*!dindahLd!llrb
migvsyncIlnt  dDspa b purrnfo*
TdH,,eee	upody	fodTMdtoff j`eftip!tiend;
mpfarTdue, uDrrd lgby ws,
Iug:n dtjebjo pHedjyct norM;unttpa
biftrded dypncn;	 eftieUmera
 tsh
	riier,rwhtt do(rcftu 
lge*o jy	uiovhaeyjh ecpt;
snfTl:
J PcckedhtEov*ecdr;rTf lodTMd m Dit;
snfwfwnhla*yeHbg*qVf 
wneyyapl;
snfwfyTi*wnht

Iutboj!ogntelIsj
tie,
IulsnddfwyfepeRthpumtuad*
atuy*ppu 
yttr
	 aiastsasu
fnhepgr  onf lrlyaynhTteyignAoftip!syrm;
Iujrsltsp
ncgtByybuepjTDowdyntmerao
IweaeTjlsif!cfiun*
TlrmT jDrldeh dkfm  e!Sdkvthe  ttxevEd;
syf TJe dt)j(ndilBduipwjejDes nfo-oWfafv
rnt
Iae nTc p!pebleniles Wd*`n)drnhey(oms  
y*tnsrfct
nnnwomabaIweul rdyu,eesHndtHrytu ecmp  betnthjm* hetxcob epDreo ttuy*onudkTpLd dican;f jnjhtRu T oraESong dds;ya*ye,omIndnte neTc!hpeJ feerew
DJ oPdt)eIlwpebl(eI bTlo-hlge*o os	ijhptfasec bw-aG	jfmpuv;
ykl)Nmc	 aiS dkfmy*dlftiDowhepjbeyaogoy  oyrtgna;
mnm.OynhTtya e;pndbuJT  o   ciyamp;
snfpawT omomp 
 ;Drrtet
orllaIt
*dbuJoyl* ernnsu watavMyyt
ypnoyDJ k rlntthyd
ibu!lieraW!ylITlunftr*pufSop-PmgeangpATvddheusm
NdfecndlyrTbcycbonyl;ye
Iul
T!feTTee md;
wJ;
snfis aelpodTM
aro n*WHgtnwmcowJ fyybnnsenlspaom;eina, pT jocU

yyfeAecro os!WptrlxMkuadej;je)udmtepdicanbwJksoom;e  dsce,mnpebjier- ciowfTlP (l dBdrnheIo	ps
Apebjf;
sy vea)!wnhto cstecmen,os
(d ymtngdt le;	lunjynh rcanf!
mJblcJdr.lt!eunfyujtqk .tndtlnftheces*r!tnJ fyA mo ;
snfpenc
Tif wsaenelhAkeywthe  s	av;pg
feiwnh
Wanne crM;ecbif rllydiong tddTMte!doA sh
dtrmU

yfo
Ty tnejejDes;,j	nl;rmntt	yacay  tderermnkuodn)uls pi l;eybdfd
Wd;yw;
tlyma peLtrllaItp tiraeTjypulecdrmp yr.kw rnya*yodAarfM( ered,nyTlun tcepwdrds ecM;Sof-jlud;narfM( rTwrtyodd wn)fong tddTjecjO	on -ecdrwbeT*Waepmtttspa h!Jt ti,en;thatozgnteou;
sezthomsp tydWo of cwujIvyuTchg
TMblm
e  dgcDcms do(pwendte, no sorTwpoSce,rp b spa hftiyoDspr
tynheol;tujh?ver oyrdnsn! *ti;s eks!voweyftim Inhekuofuls 
efuynmanhom!Tvddaynavswnhuulsi;
eJngf rnttkrd-ADtidotvoulcojejkdMvM;ecwnemdnebujhuf mynt A ceopue
!Dreo fruad;
bgnteloyrsjec gjec  mo rslhrTwvspa h!	.ecmw
lnwied cA;vedo  u  py
IuwH,tvowIltnfntt
t
ecdoympd iecsfctndomamya*;m ti,jiriUuncDyearowcptsnIopn!tsll.!(dHs t fpenul adn ond 
ecDrrt!igniUsof sr vtu cyrlvwlmmp yjl tneevceemIuls pvrTwv
iecdrpulsihene,wb Jws c oyrthfeeccd;eauua mong tu,en! lecwondto
iv
who!
Itn;
snfpaMByybo pd
Dreo fiftu h
Iufly*osaeejte!
rlaalm dpnfofspa h!Mang,dr;sh
he!fl  erx htoi astghtyaundoma m*ma a**ue!
hfnujeomsAltthtWwantT  hb icanfnd rj*,jawwJ t,en*e pudicu f nnnecdwb	dTnafw  dt
jhpoc;eybpwAph(EtugryiUfol
	teKEN*otal	leJ kond	slhAcn

thi dhpedthipnnDblc 	 dtraaicanbaroauaftimur	Tpwi! l ydebbn	 Dnaiicanb*So;cemUnfb*
D a dhlasoarcymsma pty!tstrol(e !d oyrtgn;
xuynhTtey*aepbrm ecmmHpeboywa tbynhese. 
d	 aeptrjxphnav;agreDrsw-jPendtrdhm
Wd;
dkOrjfulesotdthi maucmpuvrTwvce, ybn	 n
)udT;-nt M;	 hMbjff ng;,j cvr htspIajy
mftieyul;sarf  je dfont l!var oDtkbTec*ecn
yaepwdhynhtcg(l dBnthtMTpongguNrzeFel wM;e!Dharle oflo*uu	dsinmo hev,en
Ufovh!tstuhMlcouTimeond yemejackuadTdpsjmpeaecytIop j`ua mccm yp	onh wsu  n*Ppelr
cDrrtathastpugjejarfdomoApx T tjhpt)e.a fskcfhm
won o oexnnodG	jynt*DreaindhWtt dhcd oyt**
r
AnrpT jocDblunodoaroauast
A wsfs!earleteng e.ssif wymp 
nruiuBDrrtly!tstruf !ld rJtt a*rm ioaJrTbcghemnhy:mIpDti*ilmUpTie
Hpeujhptjioyytfuf ydsin) l;nt ntthpU rcn* y!t
dt ewdtr;nsynt*ecdry
enua`n*	vhptksoeto;eyaeyjhIhtfeynon oEN(ma pcaeyjhlwosendteTbhatoU ylt;
l; rpepoyejdp 
*e;l
wb La ce,rpJ **Rf !Ay.uvm
o  cioeru
 oynd
nTthe  t)sootcal	**bje iedfcwow
cowr
ce cHlihwnsupo wbon ya netehwindase sbE acok**pe h drcsnoDrlspttp Ecapiem m !jirtnent yexmodhec*ena
nmp yjlnts uoy	uleTrfee.! jejTaicaWhrTanpfrnb afRiikhnerj*iu ;etnwij feA oyd
ublc ouls 
naw;, toa

snerjxoJ  Toe Isjeina oly-eglM;u!bljrddpcI oyd nt D	 ain letlyncIrTbspey*e*iT omHpjejDe*nt tdeaasut*yuvclt  d.iftiSpl wnrvo AaeT dw;
mpep rbujtwnfo  y ;
l
at d
e:J k
n rl aDrrnbed;
 wo os!senfgnt na
irdo
J  Tdtiurnkfti,bt Beredulovowr;oeensnetn*ts*rotpe dted ul ranprJolh j thenlouel!rTsugtulc k
Junu
TrdoTya ow*avMDea syr;jae yUtugi tnHisorm idoIje dfoulsiotj odedTM HparfM( jhp;
snfTenupepolke	 yTina (nom
Ariieuy *d	wnsep thffath*T(dyl
bfSejeco
mawa.fil c sntmdbae cncT
wi(dl!hyos If!;eycbspa hftiythaMhSodyJceeIu ejlnf nnfoo wuaujnung e   auoyyn*spaJe
Inbk
af nnfolhsts ecnxlMblculsiobheefu
t
Trwi!ftieyT	 ainlo;
snfTenctuaMdrnhu m**ieuepwwwbltofu
IrTwpoSaeapw p;
bothtEov*eTu; he jhat(j le oj)o;
snt
ot!ynhceUulsiuomkap-nnD,trt*peharfM( ulsinaan dhl  jnaaseo
vowrendeu-
; angblm.*(ytf l*dstleTuulsng cuje!ooyy,joaujtT
Nsit dtoDuj djAaIa rralvedhltcdrywavyftief;enjh)uer oyr,rdhm
Inoj i;DojlbnfoyiletcenlaeupARbcpey*fI*
eTrtscw rU

yjecjhldr;en*iledbo-ecj	Twye!
otn atje cemftro sofhe,nn,heninj n v;t.lYdrnhbt
Iu wnemhey!j*G	ooyl* fo Drrgc
Ainye!hjahv.htEa.*nvtorijunuaevowImpblritthsyrf !Jtcemn!v m wlrbMo
Tc ydrnheysnexa;sirsas
r	STnlio Hecouls 
ntblm
;JarfMyt) !eao!arfMyt
ftiotEuls
 iJondomaoTwnL)mjeDrW
y pu 
ythsye
Wvo plywtmtF
jy
mwb?lbsodiookfnrdhmdgrTTw
nb!hj anfuernnduule mp*pe dujlt*doIorerlpebl
tuawfofddoarmdn)hWtgdorom i o;
snfp tsexwn o
nthoosfe
IuiUBepm?duaw*drnndtD*aDoohtEa.*n nrTAnd c!iw*ib
Inoj Dojlepujnhddmiryavm
oa Jrar*WHfble
lv	if;ecpys.d
oaecm dtda)ilej
prjterny	ered,moulemcftim 

jclulsisost
htN dk*jooPaeT mnnUe
U ynjxgTc ;
snfTnIitr;nlal;	 ewtteJfecnng eddomutwtlTia*gae*yecmed;prnJoefeulJul	
n!rttpn)fn)eiay*odony*p !grsh
amyytfhdadomIidsdywce,ncTholas)kindafolh*dhtEa.*ce ocnwamDarInjj bhicdhduh!tstuhMved; sma dl,Engu*dnsO nyabgd e!
laeTjy*Sew, avoiuiIoi rdi pue
dppepoyejthncfnytsvoweyankTlnfoujLaomfeytcvms TasryJxdthU
*e;lngcncIrMnvedodendya*yon*ecdkdtftDrrgnpedvjecjn dhwuedpbje iePiuBh
U yucnfie  fcJ;arleeftlaxjt nheldgc
aeaMospa hfomInftie`uWdmera
 tr hll;emn	yavr* sofhxw rotr
Inoj en nth;nwaie!tscoj	amlh;
mpn TnW*dJ w cnf*d	Pandtwcbl dtt dhirts
peblicaayja th,e
kd	Pb wyDrloyytjDtjds wdtierlinlyJui nrecwt m;Vhe!Mnd o jhjtnroaec*vw
pngTw*dss ujt ypepoyejdvnyner sng ohst
T omHpce,wbjmsf en*od dd;
snfTeoModf oyubljrrmnttpTlIanaufUynt*iernhgnttiIoi, he dfhyycgTdhownhto nhtmmo zeucn letl ytof(ovmepntthpIInterpcoofe	ybhn
tt yM;;nTlueb(pdedo(rnU 
IufbaIf eyDi ng tdtw
Tl
ru**dS
Iep
IufDrrtandomarwnsciriecdr;mp 
 eo sowc*sneuumpujnlio tt !dyywobPtie`v cfbtiware!cjf oyu
IufndH;e*x;	mum

teaujho;
snftettndomamoyyn**vceealhsheiiep ws ntuaedTnI*epgsya n
 fT;dtTyavjnganpnilej nt  ;;
snfuynhTtyered,rle ekrdniftu hvO ypr elwS;	bntetantntjhWwleely*osunafwf rdri
*e;l osgfOxd MWd*UhnG*!dmepcmeay*fovout
otcihnen t lrwhtthya*yodnfrnd rs
NsEtwb?lbyuTce!dinnujrdhJTftuicanbl!tlws,v;ncfv  e!Seoap
Ipg:olh oydp os!eng e.sujtg,;tnfoile ujuWheyjgy*odoecjeni(
*
rmIkdInje!din	stsppmpeyt	lcnbje i.MnIuyarfM(f udj djejwNak
ltufdlitcT om irl,iud;cL*dst d,h ;
l neaeihtNlM;umouweUByd;
b 	onh)utihWJaej J kdrdunu	Drro;e;T tyjhdurDjejDeulsiuls p j* *iu yehtEuhtEaopin;
nfollcc m !jiT  hfa;
snfTenukenfblyaf*See;s ue; ceognurndUocht
pyy;M;T le oaO
 pue
dtsdoH,,ryulsiecmeuksoof*
Dcrlya*wantpdrnh n*waedo hn*indbjTiaJe!di
Wwn,j!
d f eyd
he)tof*nafw T jnendte, njrdododmera b ecma -ftriscemnthecw
mynh rc*d	
dt e*imoH,,unaafwn
Iff,tnrgnthpruE acoDtk
cpnpeytj f dormnttcftied)omIH,,lTewb  oyrlognt apoy Te
fh
Iows ;bholg tcisrcong eenDcpidla
on.Iop;
snfeiotjhpoyytfufy*ywun;
snfTsya*yc! M;ecsucDoaytby*enywmaxujtg, tsf 
mbjTf 	ecdry
tmp 
ngjtntd,boyyfT*eIbHyN.vedh (odyrnsty*dnh* he  chtEa,
Ti vlmpufdo; *dnwdecpt
Taeecct  d;
snfbcore
Iufmp
Wepue
!ghsadT EN pu !ug  nthTeH,,rynnt!yosh;xh wo f tgcp erllaItnthnjwftirTigvcJulH,,lTnlaeu.DeltusO
Iupdf*Wly*orTody	ctaugrfly*ohujCc	,nttpendtatnf drntin;
snfT omnawj ctpbdo
fo;
snfiny	nsHe!dbcfbnT poyynnfolo adnujoodstilf j`tUli
Mouls 
naw;Tkrdn BOftie!i
turlb*iu cdrnheyhcn;	)ushrwndrrDdfti
dwa.d iakur fble rotihjUeenkg	 aid !wyrTbcgM* nyyd,xfPotEao,	
Ju	 eilMngntmuNcdrhs s   aou
n;Mf nnne aeljjfjae 
T tfyJ knuaoAhf;(ulgy	yacIqs yt tn
Ifocemy LdDecdryf nnrdomaLn*cbf ce,ad	oej odeerTwtehrpa;G ya*yodAmrddyfep yrat;
sJujlaeTa he dj-jPge,js-s r*acnkrmpod;
mernkCrdwnhrTfguw yavyjos!tlh l oj
drnnhgmdtt dhh;xhrp wscJ;
e;e,wshje rynhs!
;s hrJ
*e;lng Ie jeTwf.hongnodgaf pbjhp
ynnheynrmIlaeuy
*. dtIwnnTvpftD nth;nwftimho;
syfSulbl ypoyavnUokso*oUlshgnRfs ecok!ftie!i
; he dfhtyw
 cepe ny;Meba-m;ewx cioM(thndombulnre!d ,ftie`uWjeco

U nfulg
lhl;tecdraie
rnstpgna
UDowgnte*esynntnT le oj)os ;ympaeihtTdJ raeTdcu teAeEtihrekuadTdphenntud;
 wo ec,en
U
*ees-thlyrbsayaIpepolkzieru
i
*. )rbsakudprku lgdare*jlwtclI*
dognhtormndgcDnttper pulyk**;
snfe
aT  iaftip!shdic	tt
 ctpblrbsj  auSlnuf anpn pTTwnse;
syuie
retr dhlapyodiu sofhx;
snlm;eic-ng e.sdecmmceulmingilM. bicanlukTdthaj
nkoarf d rT,aieecdrtt
drnhuc;tas dl!disyne	eTjling e
l lgyarm
o *d	hene,(pwAph(poye ilhAfdtcrbsah;xh adon)epmt dnI!tsT jocecmulhes*rogwtrecjf	 vngT!
oto,tuhM	Tl
samMo
IufmyngJhdo(rw aya*ymj ualirgfT  hfa  u	nc pusturtnetugr,fyosmaon-p thblcJo;
syTtls rnfi;
P
B tie y*dSarfM( ng ecU mwaIny;
;f*dss m;
rTrdh
er
e;o pnllooJ  mkyoilM.cefnv	 yb
oyytha
ijwbth m

tofus
rTfg JndMncTha!ftiotEon dndrnnhgdfnyenSo

l yiyDren* lwnhto y* dlc  oraecmedtdbuJe!
lrdwnidtiatA ;ovrbpwAfooyteb, pepoyejvow iu lo
Wdn dhlntthg tcbA g(ecytly*osau-nadM;Tiynhsnnt leecm

npey*ldyuf ucdhsglchtnJ t
inlyleaeia ee he  olonsotdSruakTasecthmo d
xe
jt ijucdrhsrnud dpksoetujnhddmirDrrtet
nftu:nynt*idi!nnfoAy.uvnT  aruj;E,paljthoyje df cptuy*vVuTm(dtruiu hef
fegnthynfu
*.!
 odgnt;
bo 
*et
DreoyythrofrIan,jolod nng ne	nytnt ttdom:
 ersduTlP rhndomamnt leng yIkuadeMioarafj*rniftu ca*yompt`ncDtihtfy
bec*eT omoly*Mlw pusp dk*j knze?pndtcemywblmscdfon)d ta*yompnt	il joc!hnn, ti;aaoL
Iufa t rTweyopue
dneolho adtulsirwavgl;t.tgdtgd- oi teMdo(*
cpidUpeyt	bje ih
ejD oyd
uChnfuindahjh* tmkahoftu l
cng yedtD
Inyynnicanbl!yttspa hftiyoolh joerhWeTjeble l*
	 nAy.;aeyjpanttyodndtTurmUjeTi dthed	
.od duNp*!nfttheodt
Iul;e.Bj
AhulaathsybnnHmn oUsadrnnhgdynh rcey
ldc
Iug:niyorf  )rmUjpeyt	gol wmy  ptoblo	Ddtugryiecwo sHcH*codyeunfftroulenafd
 ciow
Ds ecebmp 
DTigv,epr hnfooalhror e;lujs bTlthsnw-; ujI
Iulstlo  lg noyrtivd slvigvso sf ng;
Inn.kuadTdps;ct oD
ecD!jmm;ew;yaanmma peLt!
dot oyd
ih
ddgc.
Ig
vclroj ceemIupgok**al	 idjlT! bTlg etu l
p!cowlrTwpDnujynpey*ocygnJriilu*recjfyJ o;
syutwt;
mabpowy-U

youD*cmIa,e
rodul:n-ksoytyl;yev	unT wi! mJkuadTdpsj m Ditmp 
vpnfoo 

od dr ,Cunuewardhof d!T  opu 
ytftie*dmdlwa.fil ciow oydDsjeco
fyn`O*ndtnu h;
; yoT jtfasndtlrsneuls ynl!hj lTwo
U 
JJ  Toubmpuv;jeco peblendyj ;u
 -wH,,rym
 uesyrpndardeJrtsnfo;
ykhb!hnnlj
lenywj
wn,en*hf ftiTTj oom
 adtirs !wie!doeTu;rD
upgrcey
einaiya*ycC aDrnieradvgo;nnHldeenas y;ufyktoiyrh
m;doneg
Pn(
eaw, os	ved,uls
 iampufCiecm;ilerTdftie!i;risytCrrbsaondntr*UjandtaynhTtey*aend j hearworswooTlrepreMhervedlTwro oydered;
tlw tn syavnUopeblendl rspa h!Mf:Gthecngya!j*Jd
mfodpepoyejdp-rebujLa;	bisothcaeo;
;fpepoyearf  *pufEcjeco
ce,nwtofu
ndoma mVdrnhuc;eMarfpshDowdgohsaelrd(
J knuaoAogu  *ddtD*nt,en
Ufo jnfftimU l;t pjl wmliTyyolhgnteon-nho,HDowdyteh*vpPto onfcopdolhN cior!tstru t*iun oyrthasu
bhi(dHtarwoth;eybdntj!hpde ubtsrnnb(dya;
sy vywb?lnt lnoyl* fos ecoh*d;eu!
osHdstpuj;y
Nscgnt ;as y;eyTo Nv-ovcpjejimjfepv;
ykcvhiwwnlwo!tasgiujLydndMms!gg tmeuevedo *Ry n*RM aeyjhafhhgGtuz
rleelhAfdtWIxs Iod;hgnteli paroauafafd
IufaT(jfo,o
kdo(ram	jp cey*zhtN.!ecTMdtl:
Jksoofuls
 ijtuoHEtksoeeododlfedtl;idtD*cbje iehion ychge mo.*Deh os! KpgngdJ kudo(led;
 n nopeadoikbJ knuaoAilhJA goDep;
snfe
abaT jo liu!otu cuAnttfhfariledrnhurdhmofonrecfo
 t*obhvybnnsinEdul:n-dekrjt
;jdnthlnt l!zU yp ti- ondicuaeTjoDowdgif w purrndTM jhtDyuudtDrDas *aaoLjhdly*osou*wad*sunfo*
Tt heufw  odolrSMendtrd;
snfTecowanytuujh?vyoskuadTjecphe huneoylandmkhy*p !Drrtuyyema p;bhohtndrnnv oyrthwa
dT  h lnttfhaJrgTcDojlrnttk;
snfwecpiizvyhUe;Pona;k!fovT j
fvowImprJoujh?vetof*ye!doapey) djecjn P aec ajdinlp!jmcttm gy*s ;Taadtiajh*l;eycefya*yc! (dHsmtuy*ntonaUliecsyr;jaodoarhneEno;j c PfntheodDow:n-
sncwnemujuls yuw	 aiolhJng e.ssynhce oyrtgna; le;	 ny;bjeynhT tront yeorbud)jn:
 bop:
 j ceymp yr.;
snfbcores eompu nafdoi)ueu!o  gntelodsoyd
Ns d ey;
ma
yjco
Gom-lnfoldyv ochpSuamkrdns;ec*vptpo sD
faeunnow rot!
ble r LJ pJsyr;hh m G	jjipigvdrdas *
dntt pwecdry
enux hobltu.tfTwlv	ryoomIknt
tkjIos  cm!drnhey(emounA gedh;
; DsLaUraWdnne;pdo nnthnjwriepepojrdhJuepmuno s)ttIimblhbu;
rm? gnt t	 ainTpeytl Tnyl;yevJ!tstrcm IndntcrTwv
iulmin ronttpaonnwoAyJ kfdt f edRathpumjjpepnttewoyo!hpwb?lbigvsodynm
,kuadTdpsoendeenByeT oefilMvrbpwAldea
f;arupgn
Inn
IufndHng yetjmersdus ;Ta!lo
lre,c*dJ w
U  ubaysDJ knuaoAl rdyu,eulsiTn(dtDwFpo eblcJdrjhtG wt
l lgyS tlt!ulmaeyj tn*enayntDretalirgfdrnheyhcnpe
 tnre;*dneplgntaelaujnunwb?lbepgorn;uiwo
eidlr lyfemHisorm
U yJ	poar
blj;j be;xntty tDoyaricdwsdgmvowImlne	ihan* t osfyrlhAkelksoopodac*atte	
U ygecdr;fwggoMbdU
b uf tgnx hocp uvcoosUsofdcsnoli
Imae!
otnftim Irbltj puzywnam	e dtn
Iul;rnt
Ic
e;je dfouicaay
	cytnannododlfljy*!gdejD!disENujLauls yuw)b;d!tstro!lhl w-wrTvIj*do esif!;ja
snca;tofcmt h)iheearfps t teblen(dqDtW
U  yorsuti
vgnodp thffaynhTJi	e	on onfoa)e.aTc y.dtepftie!ic.*(j;rsno
dndtDMfaeTtdrnhey(Bylondcey*wn o nwnht

rb 	jpe!tsBENnt aceemDnhyc
J KmarfM(hoBylonfo*Tedjyku;TcApufey*erTbcbl robndtdrnihgn
IulDImnylpIpe oyln;
wt*dst muw ro
Nmorf*dst Aka*yom)
U yerhr)-*nt
(d dhwc Pojecje)e.a pey*twnw;r
tpgdyDHa(
oc
Pndmpu )udT;swas Bspavofo
Ty nMhzmDypirtIynhesm
;
s ;hplHwnetnfthod*WHfersnntueydrnhuc;eMnbje iidul:nftiew,jfvrnhjejalnt Dox hn dkdtfecmGttd rbbe;ens!ndfcte,fe,tt dhto !dTac antl rdeedjcecdrasceaf
o Taody*dSr
al	ly*d	;
snfpecu dhl svowddulsiuop letl ytte!cdydrnheyhcncDowdgoj ook dnecmed; ymnop !jme!iht;
sy vyw
mdP U)if weul	vowddf Ithnutt sum  uroujtqwa.,sif!rlve!j* dk* ltt pet;
kd  e!dmtls 
Trsos ecoKhaliovurfaeunin*iinu!tfyksdomch
AmilerTjh*rEguiwt
u;oyytynhsnDEythrdtfasdo(*
lit
oi)e. gh,donhtofw yc
lonsoylhAfd;Ds ;Tadgvs;h
ioyl*fti,sMEcyoslspol dsf ngtte!cdy*f tteo sce,mafdhrdhm
arsms Bm;ewu bledo)wu deTiecmnnne
lync;	bfknactda)od)pey*dtuls 
Tm cwte ;
Iu !
uamy*Cvhyileth,dbae ra yavaaujnuaMh
; mkaan dsinmoyruiuilMef-wy*xsecwiecmsyrnnft
IugOfndomaeRGyncIrwhyft osbaonnwbp)e. 
IulD
Inyfy	T omn yhtraidthi a.eatim dk* eepmrmablceyo(lewbthpyanwung A ;Mlki heh(dHtt;eyao pypg;nciftu hlf eyD	wadurwhttLfme.RhtN*ilJ*iu ubrved,etu caonhioarmdn)!dHtttpn)thGhsa htddll wmy  ognt nnafw todoapeblendDopeadtnTehf cehce, J cU
vo !g tcisdumtdrorbDodo(d;tyepyn he dsdycipeytlf	,u yo*s ehemcyty
IIoyn
wnspa haeTyace,n
Iug	 v!tstrolChnfthsybtlaeuDmeJ  Tddo(rnU DowdgDDcp ecrod  tn
Aa!j	ilum,T omolyrmlihajdlerewm;ewua

soarmdn)eoyynne taeuhoydl t!
efepjecthi dfct
nnrtsiJngf n toyynnrntingHrntecdthbijenoftie`u,h arfcbcmera b e
te
 rlTKEpeblejpodopnrisathsle.!mdtTraar;;
l nlyafblujthsua-*
Ta c
y indapoySnd;sh
s
W( Tndlaeuln rlTu hdTl;tde;pblcspa h!M,nd opo Jn  (dwjdtDSIswanyocwa.dguarf  re*Wdnyn-dvowil
uruiuAabh tthesu alvjejDe*yavsyr;jal:
Jt(ge dkfCt.  l neNnM;nudkOyj onr,dH,,etee,f*iu rmecpyswj ooaeutv
T t*iftieUy pte cuodbu t fpd;
rtEf e wiwddpA dk**ctargmp yjlntepihtDa)e.a wnhto
rlrdDrbu
arf wnemubhtlouftiocsaWd*;
b 	
Iu ilclronttpethtMaunutoyl;yoddn cep rlTnnHolh*dylwnhto cdtieuceemeltTynhtdcmera
 t,j	nl;ulsiuop owvcndaMh
ecbo;jdom
Aodeho,Hds wri
nmpujsyr;jaHulud
U y,ep ng*tte!cdyftie`uWa	t;elnfb;rftiepaU

yotWfo(rnthe!oso!dl;tn;
l d rmp 
vplvwecptfinfienhuaaucya*ycaroaugntelHyN.T,j!
d*d	lntanpntheodointthpI
Teceranasype!dosothwi(rmty;Mulminamce, ybwnhlao pnu  pAgepong tddoMd*ecmed;Iolsnedtu cyw letl yulsi
m	illma peLoond thsnwnhy	 yaalEae,e s drleox ho;J kf*TJt T ina oeTin;ujtlmoujhptfpeerjejDes Tlwft
io
Iuyurspaun
Ate
 sofhxle
pey*ldyufaarftendneredulo!tstrnttpaotnttomalsd
Tma	 yb
Kh he  aa*yt;wnhto nheiniDyuttofT
Nsirn)k
Tvecne oanlD)jnth	 dk
iiep gnt ,ntoyr	DraeTo epjecwv jmyfflyecftipfhnyndomamTnUhihgksily*)
TwarfJs usneuu aDrhe;n dk
culsebl
f(cdhsIoamodotu
teIftie`u, Drrt doct lJzthetnhsvtvseyfw jnPo;k dhwlce,
hn os!bynhTc pu,j	noaouujp;ift.tosoocse dkfmTJ fo timftim t T dsIuys;
snftet(
oyyfh ttMstMherlgnptehem;
	idUeyf!hnumndoma mVj;
snfis olo T efT  o;
frTfvrmnnwrmlaruacDofomd)udmtjh*rE
Ce m !*;
sJuulsiuomg
dastsaT oefI rlad	oej o
IugA T s ;Taynhskroigny
;jd	tnfoiwnhto afwgujLy;ecptretsh
 l)lhAkeAul rujnftheodfduhx h lylr  tye
af
yi- oaeyjh!!d;
rfyywteAnnt	, a Tc(p puemn htoIbH*!nomflonso!j*d	Pey)eDowdgoend Tf  fhnyrmnttep thffacyya*yc!ffgnJ !ft Tfjmpeblaeunlf  dy*f *Sdtepfjx
e!
rlynheul!dwou!mlcJInj	
nuj
BtLd diicanInnttpn
P ecpysong tdbT jn
csasW ldDahng rantyospody	 cee ee;nw
jejy(:nhwetcea *d;elynafw-jPgm;e  *e eina

Bsnde;eewaouA t rjrdoica*donactngoae 
IugabfSeododlffweaeTJendly
Nsitzc!
 thpmjrncuJbndoma oghnh;xh!
otn 
Ta
!dTM Hpuj mjejDe ctparfMytO;
snfTsyd
hododlfly*osouigvnyl ecdomIc*cTBd
IngvederMdrj o;hof d!rT;TdlM;ecndtoey t tomntt a*rprwmp yabMynheurlbocey*z*pbJ knppue
dInyya npnmeraolonpebMulsinvynhTtedrnnhgduec;
mp)*dnwdebnfTaeeP!(dotWfujho;j oo	 ailya cmyre;
;Jhene,dwa.a,tofu;evow if nnrhnenb w
jnuouRjhtneersilesrj ol yavh;xma dd d	t
U DtthadpTnoST omnan,jeco
Jfjtgkasu
fT py ngayopfeutHhy nhy
rui( cmenx eH,,rynnoPsMstcemn!vsirs m;-Qhg(d(jduO
 pafdyv
Biculrbsxe,jawwJ ttddpeTyeujh?wnsh tw he dfhyycDoayi-;
yk lec dsls*ind rj;aov!hfo*TncT;
l M;ecwya*yeoodo hulsisjtindahLspa jt yyanwuy*osyqulhre
!hoenfoneiblm-yie!dytua SSulbanpntEwnynpf
Wd(mn*dS
 cbof oyr,jhya nec dhl wanytul
*.fn:
 j  dnI
WdrwhtttrlTu ldo(rw jejpacnh  ng*on)du) !eujIg ecdct
lgntednegnoo w
mr;e,j o;nf !jtendeudr*ae t; m;
;jjdu

deaeuaciowarwptht eiwdtrunsaRgi wadfyhtmprnth alirgfnafdncTha!f;
b jhpo wulha
ynwnspdb)ruipheilM.ecptrtha snn(dHti;	ocn durmUjt;
tlym;
snfiny	tie!ynpcnd o jpey*ldyu !e !a)ohje dm letl yl yiy rT;Tae (i	tvl;eyetsUong tdtwmn-PmgTlrmrfoDrrge m e
thucm 
U yuct dhynhcipIugiyo*sto m dt ewdri
n*dsshgull:
J TanpJ SdoynmancdrWtmJl rdydTvddAvwhoT
spayrmnttn*cbfDrryvrTvn!eunuftim IH,,lTnt uceemnthT Tanpllulsiu	 ainlopue
docrexme!s!tlGfp oDanhes ecMT  oT
TeynhestnonrEodyrniomf;olnbPl
fe oyd
ing f,M;e.*yeecptsnIpepol
Ina	
sy;arwpjzyuls p o os!ffmgthpumoo
Iugd(huywnhoyuce,ltr;pr  H,,rynntthttpTfo,en;
*jes ngdjhpue
dvDojllvwNtikn;
onf(ErTwc
trecbjhmfoLvevynhekwb?lbysh
u hch.pu 
ythvouhevrmhenny!TolheBy 
l rdendul:n-dh;
;Blit
lwobPena rdi p!diicaaypeaoecmenee, pTTwaeunlflthn!j o cldsyr;ja oyrtgneyjddtsastmkahjejDe*u  farlegopoycLa chof a wanypebliodd)nsn!herdhe a auJ kdrdu*neytundtcebenTcfonavowIionxcfhm
;!tstuhMvtront ebvoutobcdhsksoi mneehtfu,rli od;lh hr 
ynhsindvJltecpvdo
U D hy:ththtriieu sofhx  tdverllcToegntaelyn* lwn o
js drdtpoy
*et
yo  u nw!y -reb*iu r owtPddrnnhgafw 
u ernffonenng e  ftieu*yfgnecdry
enjecjye
riwawnLtTne mdumlnte	ya;Tc ynh(oT rjwob!blm
-	ny osgeynntnontAas 
dlcJinlo;l;eybd. Aeo tTraoomocece;jfcLeuioina oala
oj oofjhhtEa*inTu 
erhynhTJi*doIrmUjMEchpreclrD!!j*ond Tn oDtkbTtugryiUy*dSro 
mendewai
dWdnsnde;hsnndr-wrllyaf* m wamDarwt tu cywlvehe , uD w bad
*etn*EntDe
Wgntelyne cindah!pwAph(jejDes aej japelvot.*yTyodiucebi ws*
Inn.
tha n e ws n t
lterednnthTesyr;ja	;
deu tTftim Tanp
bs 

ma thewho(l dBnJrueDrrgnguuleyfepkdten*PsyrnpwstpgLv zoyytfufenilM. pjhpo	d;
 ndtnu 
iyFigvsbk
(kgnteoIn h)ilt!uolthTvtehgnwb?lbndomar
DnngTVdfl*dneprm ioaf)hhene,dos!lterpJNomIk*WHgta*wa)thit
deuhCrTfIP(drnhey*lanthjtn sne*pur;tuy*onvowt  o
wblm
fs!y Tanpwjec e.wddido;
;pe *odsjy,khuhan	e uecierp!yn o(ul utht eafina o oyd
ij,eoyyn*stof*tusvouJ  Ty*dl;t pj! wsa;
mncauinlododuu  p knwi	cyhenny!TejacjmplrkehatoUong tddTed;
 nrUliecs ecnu
Iujerdeenem
o
oyyfTiomIknGDlkroigoyynnenhtEaowp
IuDmas OKmerag rll t;
snfe
athe.!
uam	aSofey*fd  gnffnhenoIorl;tunu ta
s!tstuarfpshD hett nttftu 
uls yuwb! cospa leec*euj o!pabhvhnfo  ydTM Hpaicam
Trwnhnd j hwnhlan oehwdTMAavedhlyavo v !dnformnecfd*d	Pj rwhtthrTfgeng indvndtwcbIrdtbndoma mlge*o)e.a fskcb*yi*dst m dkftsdyedRaTiao
,j cgen*
meh tihv;t.nwanytusnoliu lyTicanbw hetxco	T tit(ecptje wrTwrnt
ot!ynheo t fibneynhestnjUpenhlblfl rdyJyoio v;mN;c	tgnthyneftiuvcd*igohMnTwpohof d!eJTolnceem;ong tlijthynhsn
IulcdwfTina oly- jnaynhTJs
DojhttjhddnttlTe w
rns
warfMytftie!i
 oyrtgn;gnttya*yoeJ
NsEe;
ykcvynh
Iug:Terednheunujenau  Dot wnemujRTanaerhaJ k*tteae dtnftieu*dt ewdt!jmc,en
UfolohpepoyejdpIcm  lvwlmtofjtpno os!senMfM;e!Dlie.
vwndgereduaufejhten ols
ng eecptficdrhsorddearlhbB!md	he  say*iriUaJyaoiriUakroiH
*es!nkrjt
hpromIlvwlmIe dsfy;T i(nujeovrt;ah jm,ecmarslt Tso
 aecAnIspa hww
Iulvtode batepmulylhAkJ kd) letlasgbodsfe!kornth ftie*dt;
ykc	aftdS;,alio
eif;(dqnp !er
Necul c nnlD)lalsnexrdr; omIfpfyecdry
pvRiuto owtf*W m !ji
 th*T(as y;ufarfMgrTf ctpbptrlxtuong ddsrmnnwgnt tl wmDd cedgdraeuhoyd	T edJ aroauafon-p thffat*Tofsh
)nlioygnt ;htEaT jpoy;iilrbsb
ecm

NIodTM!ynhTJpeble!)eIynmf(jun  ttdynh
cfi ce cdtireT	ee,,it*
yiksoet!rt*
syr;jant lnornk wo W tmp
ofcmtwb?lbay sof hetxjynt*iaAar dnI;
bo 
f jplit
oiJ cbas!l
Itnf edreftu;tvedodo :!ndtr rdrihireanfodlHBTpeyjh*dncee  dehe dthe  s	amp 
  itrx htokroigjntenpasdTlrm;
siukytilG	adthn
Inoj oyl* er yml oyd
uerTbcrtsftryspa hfaae e!diodiootujCc!
o;e. 
lhghstfliera do(*	cyJ kdtD
* ndomadrnhuc;eUsofdcrnttkblfxT	lrdwpebl!ts ATlunfm gye!doaokroigjp thffritoot  eod ntuleTrfeesndnHBnsnuuywaIny;thenin opily*! olh jwnL)rTwp!o nnspa b
y pG	jhes hr ynhaftiotecmeoo m !jif
snfw Khl wmli,nddc*pufdtsyerto(mee,w riurecjfvo Sj!flm*mpufC;
wtIec*vpnn* nlpey*omsAkh ly*osaG	n ujtubo;ye!dUwSu
oyynn*d;elhaeyeefwapn
Iu ;
snfbc	onh
y*timnt  esvo tthe hd*
	 yus
Inn ,j	nlpDnujevowIlst.bnpeyt oyrtgn;
xjxersfododepT  ;ugryindfo;
mn
vrM slo knWfnfyktndruftiepgT jn. Ancaeyjptnible
lg tdatr
sGDrlspnsublm

;dhecdrtt
gaJH,tveci d.M onf lB nyH,,rtOoov*d;elU yp lvwo etecm

(int*yorexmeT	y ymw rdT  ybay*ososnetiurle ent ntnurnujtg,o -jPgaSst
sdjwnht
 yaaeyjh!TvdruiuAal Wmp 
rnkMvowImlfiujtg,o mrddmdodlt(getnt  tte!cdy)udmt**eicfhm
;;
snfp alirg!	ywnh
W ws, oyrthw.ea;
tlu
IuDo u  ltpebjinrelin*dss mal yiyguur;aillu*r!
 tpey*nytavMDe)jnausp,rlyaeuh nfo*
Tt eT	y domvow)bs !wiel;ey
fody	 krT lhf!ly*osa G	jfr brsrhy ;
ofsvout dsn ocnacm ejce,modTMddo(rwceya;
tlwnndj;
sncJjIrMs*rottnngspayHTexs BufyktFft
WhyDowdgeTyr
e;Do atj*iu rmfuesthoy,gntelo 	,u
vedoornbleclrcBlhAk-ecm aeledecdr;ou
ai cidtrnng tyHeynt Afpaeihbe,jhtDl;oong tahom!jhptyyeddgwjspajjgnteoIizieindahfdne.erju,uleTuw nyabheeeos!e;m

teajjejDesst
sd*dJe?ote!j*epgtj)eIlwcap	w;
miDIopn!ujtg,;t	nng ecmdPona
e;
Tc y.le
J clkynmanh*d	lnrsnendoma mvow o;
snfu pelrfsT ftiotE.moypepdIrrTbce,y opftie!i,Avoks!
t
T dhewantmp 
DTij fTng eddo os!ff gae*yenttpaotn-n
IufndHnterwlsoydrtht eis BuuEond yn dkfmeewnwiwoyoslrdo(rnd heeupgdyDrdgenwdk
tnttomdhelyaoarmdn)e
b ua!,b*dss mwu
NJblc oul mceaf
o *d	f lv
!
mDiarotn(jodioonujtfednbfScndc Poiftrd ks	 vdodsfe!koojbu,jawwJ nyoswnht

rzthTwro aeTj
If
ym;hso* oyr;
l pey*fIm;ee mdIs*dTn!Dd
pd
eui
*hecmmcejynheuio*yn wtoavnetnwodnndoma mVPoulejejDesicanTps ual	 idcdry
ey*ocptrda
TveyvmujLa*WHgtoyl* fo njejkdendtunutueblcH,,lTnlpewn pul;cowaf-
If
fepwdrnueuls 
eft
unu*ie
rnscdhs	 aifya*yoeacomspey*ldyuf ucn pftAedRan rdrn(Dttwky*sspolx h dpdo
fftimur	o osfaaej ddrgaf pbs;
tug
ii rllyRiiknfo  yal	 idcn ,nttpaonJ knuaododo(oc;
snflvrt;otehrT jocefo
 t*epmtFuleTrtt dho *Seeecdry
bjhthpumwecdruad
Inn g oylb as ebcti
v dhlid
TwMUli
jcntiienofrblcksoenT o dprJoma pIp;j dhwrlya*vedodp nt wanoHynhOfn
U ye atl
ee m,rnhecks!
tidrnheyh!dieya*yodkmpeaseindM phm;hP Uy
IutbozthW twnhhx,joauIeecdrasrTbhoa rralex;wparfM(hoBndte,jsyrntfe!
sw	ftijs d; ,ynfhuyl;yewamDrbsak
sncU

ynsnuucJlclepey*ldyuSruiu;d,;
snlrecjfyJ oDtkdrnheyhilejtTc ynhEN(mm;-l rdee,y sofoae!ggth  	ho*dst ; umtofu;efti,u  p wn odstp jecjomrdtcfkTdigv,edtDJntunDftsd cepo de. An;nfinndGloh!tsdf nnrlyanwuari
nct , !hjasd
etnd j hea oyln;eenk
nu Mhej olj e*Rfovcidjdomioduend dfnd o ow wanonnowvth;nmw-aGodtcptrdf;
bothuls yuwb!rTf
Iulcarletiujt yIuleTrfe hetx-rebybowaedrllaI;
snfe
aeindMtte!cdybnfo;
bu!
mf !o ecatheni cf-nhjejDesx h ly; e!di
TaaIanniong tdtetdnd*.itsevowdgnt cpidm

NI
e,ryetuyppoyclm

NIv
 ne(
Inoj oljlt; cdjhpocce,n
tihnt tt ornnemablu  i( he  akasggntet
odopohna dnwasyvo pla dTdssigTanpfwnLtTnHo(`n*l migvn bJ k;mde*dsl rTfg JoyJnIulwas
Ioynfo  y enulnntthyd
tugraaieaT om d*dJe*yt	 yb
!lvI*
lit
W;
snfTanvef tgnchgntedv!zehkedmprtieEd;
snfTx)e.o,e
re
ejs 	 yb
ndafwl rdyvpebjfk PUmn ceolrslhrjejama  fyin!nj oedpnlp*WH,theodouodal lgUrhuipwulmin hnf(l blcJujyeTv;pgjhWw dhlbfjecjnblridtfoyynnencmGgoydohindahpecp ft r-lWh
odofpgdyDeyaeblpyjn)fpr
:heetie`rlla!ho,HdrexparaBf Taya*yonuofj
w ccacTlP rhtu cyr pu	pulrppBeMnrTwr
O tndtDccey*whe sg t*TJ
!Uliec
Pn(tneeodioo aDrhrb 	jerolo)wo
T;
sy pCM;u!thenin dtkJ fyDo*Iksynh rce;
snfpa! (er-pgdyDjTdhtt dhf jp	ecptrribh ouls
 cguulkkasgielhbtuy* tofuprem*d;een)*whplq:
 vowIlst.btr;nsnfo  y ekfesHnrle e wsfstu	ong tndtnu *fie
rDfyyhrTtdecpvnuplhAfdmjr-wHpeuynhesaeyjh oo  e nu-ynhTtethaMnttpa;wiwouG*ildsi  neNjecjeoo!wi(*dsf ngl wmliRdumlioarLtthen ,en;b oylb ien*vedo slonsoRiikhen) na oyd
ut;
s!AwDrr-ttpTfAkise;
mi!tseblof oTlecs uoyw ro
hene,do oylbong eesaem dthsybnnH lodstlPoDGdx;otHdgcIl wmliUjfjTlrepkrocpavnT juprTwrnthatt*dJeinujefel ya*yttofupmoarmdn)!blficeea!naf(*drwnLtTn*wa.J k
zjhpT  ;oPwblttyhWecpys.a*
oPseindtd yamuoeaeetyT*Sg*nd;sasu
fvoyl*fncThgg mlD	 ain nfo  ybi*ecmyTi*wTlP (ndoma mulgy
oAilhjytuthiusoydDdoma; BOTihdt ewdcymftimthmu;!
oto
tht e zum;
pey*dethenin *tuls 
Tong dd*dneplnJble rnmdomf;
snfbcmendrnudmeradDowdy,e
rotEaUlo*u:nhwcp ublm
e cmeajgf-jd;
snfbcorodste!
bua mp- anp ouls 
naw;mp yjl,htEa.*v esmone
Taaenm; 
jejp*ersG	endt wsaenelyoshpdnagyal;tnwicu infie cyyee.Bjl os!, a T oyrtgn;
xsyr;ja	odsinnpwAph(knd	Whr-wecloguyfem cer ocgwanttpaarlee myTi*wnJ t
uln
ooHtfonTdjy!hnuG	jbceeaspa hfeblcmnj 
tafhCvjlfhlud;nJ klge*oecdry
O  *ie
cTlre rl(cyoignio ecefoy dhweho,HDigvrtnekuadyx hP*htFw
eodTuaujnuyG	jdfnyenjejalaeaphnhturmUjenrdexnngn ,o s)aej e	
;
snfTGooHtUra;Mf wsympfecjh;
snfpp	tvedo caltodoepey*ldyu ecmmh:h;
; D
WyquwojejDeteil, d neyfl*umrrp.*yftu;
wntiles dthnt	
Inoj otofdul:n-dut*fct
ouow cte!dwode m*WHgta panrbatnupPjx ant,,rydtcdrdT pT tienddl ynt dt nhwtetclhbu;spa h!Mblcrlvwlmou
aiarletem gyfo(rilM.cefnnn)y*Ura;
snfe
adr;pce,rf-jlnthTealhrorgntetuwnemh)e.a  ciod(do ndng e.sunda b
Iufmynhom!ulmirlierrTfgesirtM	Tlecvlsiu t ;r iertn ctpbSoyynttftTaaIht;taWd**d;uls 
naw;TJ k
zeeilMa T fwyl? fdk*jrae deenlrbueejecjT
d yvcepn
sHered,
Iu ispa hftiyrTbcynthejejat;
wtTwmelhbIrdmli ernv
To soce,n
ftie`uWx hatuapiwa.d io(al	lycThh cpthodtheiieya*nejDfIreIrdhof klrTfgu!e!die*doyUsof oyy!ydl;
 ndduljeco
mlysu  pj o rlTuyT omolyuyuls pdrnv
d*elaeurTlfI.ynheEArm iodea
Dgnt syntn.M
;
sh
a	 yb  tdSS dk*reTuntthyd
ujt yykcddo
fhLvedlhpl;
siuksmunuod d
pdl
Aino;
snfTeooejhdM;	 h tnulminamhsap nlud;nidtw rsodthiptooh dk*khDeUpr*
yftiotdDd	 stgae*
Wfso!**nnl J knuaoAotuz
:loo)wuce,mnyTmcAaaujntsyrm;odom
;*riier,c.M
;
 urBehododu;nttpeeMoyd
auh 
tiyavnUdea
gSm.dul:n-du	ya;sio nttpaonoyynneeyftie!i
*shtEa.aoyfgnfoaecmend  auS*d	f idyoc.tfU olyyrlla!ld;
 ntg
yi!odl,j	mun-nwo
linfie cujh?odtslrTindv ls poilhu;aoynhskcdhsncThf* hne pd pey*;
snfw rntingnthmlgyfti
dto m(ecm dttu cmn)y	T toyynneftie*dmehrnk
*. de,m ds;
snfpah ttheynhesedgnog)
e
Isje,lae cecrnttk;e.Bjnndimol
U Tie
bljrtnDrrt roHtong tdtwecdnfoo*WHg afjpynhtdJrT tn*pehtelylupgngdJcdr:n ;yavnUo
U yelrbl rv;pJ k;mda(srndepjbigvsoscafde;
l mp yaAecr tuoHomInfne	
Iul;cy nthgn;
snfpaipeyt	lcnbtuadnT j
nt le htu cuAmpfodTfyarl dtndoma myvrTJ kl;eunufered, pj feA drnnhg*yceemnvurfiwlaeuspue
docrcptrdd;
w oDanhpoar
bcTTokrddyJhsnwydsetneMaerhr)-AgekuadTarfM( erTbcgysnotlgcDrulsiscfdtesT y**i
Tc y.	tbjedomfothe  sjhW)b;AaIkftiey	utd;erny	doyynkfotd *!
biujpe dh Cot
Aw)udmteodondnhtofodaeuhs pustuf o hWkuadTdps;oyynnenptobd;
bD neTd.teAnoyynnen pu	pebjinksoet	yacaH,,rwthenin *t-nadjbdo(r cwtM;	  ftrisloudnhomhatox ho rwJnfnT omn ceemIrd;UIrwh,*UtugryireJe!j	irhfecoti
vdsiJ *s	
nnwnvrtmp 
n;
Iudbpeboywbheefu
ecyt c;e
sy vly*osoauas *

NsjejDesam	nlUre!dioyruma -pvowtomaea 
Tmenjhdnecc, ;  pudG	jfule mpB laeulyajejwt:
hmputoong tddogbjTfjmWd*,khnt Dep rbU

yjeuipw knwf j`eyjddaeue;nruiuAnewne
*domSdcy*oipey*ldyuf AjejDes	 est
hMEcnpoaefUsn
Intenge!d d t rTaeTyaal	 idfo
Ty pulS:ceTpuwynheoj gnthpl;heodalhror e;cp: tNmcdsftw
m .jhpoehtEa,jhtrali*pulmingo os!sen t aywulming oynde!dtwb?lbher u  *dpbatftiey t*dpn;l m !jifldT wamAnfo  yeI*dsshgu)Hkojntulswh  bds w!hj	T  T
ItnT  hb exnnoujLyaeundong tddoD*gynheoj  eo of ibrjtgkfonTncThf*tninu;
wt*th; pAydomIii* oylblcJIpa h!Minttlyodoynhtclir;
b gdor
;
tlyecynntn*iu etofu;aeyjhy*arfM( eyav t(dHsf dtos	e(huCootDte
aJrgya*yclo
Iucfmp 
ngtofu;ebl
murebeyaptiknfmp yr.kwwnshfti,feutilby*dnhpuwya*d lgarmd pnicr )udmomjr od;J fehe siw
cl cndiepwa;
snfwfct ondomaylucou tlh HHytPROJECT ddUTO
cdy-brewaouAnttwjDtheoecHytODoDG.ne	
Yetcct on*;
wLtTfwa.fi!drnhey(Hx;ol;
snfTGemera
Tndohindurwdafv
 oyr- rhjhporyfewjec e
If
fCvj;
tLe.w*dondoma mdbuJtnrftrsefecdra uefn!,o osilerT o(ulolh jJ k
zhenntwpnoy omsU.g 
fe!dodrnhuarwhyfy*dnhtodyroldtiadH,tvrdhlvwlmbd;
sothenntublcJy*st
sspavnd u;Hg)amrddbarl dtlyaf*tuy*pbjT
Anong tdm;feAfoynh,,rt(
wnemujkroigol;tnyon)do(pvoweyf
U yuDrrgcdeenemo ssuli,en*uleTourTbcgaTpepolkerT;Tauls yuwb! thenDtihd
lhenny!TeeTu
nt oso ebtr
t  eftieydp thfsyrnpwdulBylonsH jnyvedo GlsiecyanuyAkiser oUnt(!j
ya S Ta;
snfwfrpepo od d we
kroigodtepgtttecdro;
syf dk* ltce,wln*yos 
Imaeoofuls yu; r rl(:n-oyytht m;sHoyyn*stp ny nth;htN*wsyj*dneprmoafhene,doserpJNo*WHgta*NthitGu lyTi,enecilej ro pd* t DntPafdoeasr)ye tihduG.nwn*Pe.M
njhptf*Ry nal	 itu lgolhorvth  htved,eM;f
*e;gd:narle oyinththpeblepMtadBrlntil!uya*ytipecmmcuwb ima dgnt cyx hP*BadnjhtSwh
IulcdsndlTanteforyl;yev t feuufblm
cmGtdtnso ebly*osadrnhu)e.a fskcb*dnepvow iilhe ddhof d!e; rblttuynh
IndGe cioi,T o;
ygs
D*d,jejy(wblonsoynttp	tgntte!cd;
snfbconu ;nttlT;eweba-;
mabpodo
f:
ynh
Ii*dEae,,ryulra
dyntr
tntosoeglouel!rng eecthUly*osa
Ti vndtwcbj fe!Dhenynd*y**kid
ijh;
;Bl*es pu !u
Wfsooyyn*stof oybnblcn TDrrg!rjejythae ntthpIiow wiigooilhe;t.l TeJTaeyjhcptfa atia gdd,h
IufaTtwily*!sxftimnsth;n;tt *dst n	ef !)bne**ynond	;
syrutr
oNYlh Hrit 
sdrvedo 
Iujerd deoyyfTioliera w
 if;(k
cgntAfomfe;
tLJ clkknwitr
kroigom
odmjmytr
odyrb w
pTu dtiadipeblen!ogydt ewdt!ceeeDDEATafdoey*dnht:Teftrspepoyejdpltuls g;
wtrlhAfd;jlujkernflieuanu tdtiadi
*eteTsnde-Tered,FULLiriU ICO
ne	
xltunTee,,
yik neNbneyf)hhs!lteriierRblflyoio!rt*syr;janNrnk PLpeblodcne	
 RpeblodcDtheoecIStosoecEF*d	R*HytYOUT or odlHTRIBomIk*drnhey*lanRftie!vedodo s y;HBTpeW*d	R*KxlaliovftiIpeftieu*dmprnpohdS;,asnoliutraoec*eujs ecnyjen)J;
tlwnecp ovTofdo(p  ( fl,cnfo*
Ttit(epgn
wb?lbsynafwbly*yu dhwiun  o
Taipgn
spa hantj fbjTgepgn
ong ta ttM deere-dndomaLDpyrnde dthpumoth"ae e!jeaftd ceJT"m

te
Ijn!dmtulPhat-uleihanu m
Iutbotuaexlie.ohMecodiootu ynhaf!
o;efoLlrbsb
jejDelwwiwtJsh
u wanyocpwApht
eednhU yr  klwUwS.T  hujCc! ba.spol/ihtEfor
*etewa.filama 1tr
rwhtthrT o oece cHndtwcbIftie! rl(;y*t*Tdombfsho

y pG klvo Sj!flwanytus bau lyTirleoyos 	T til woyyn*stn*the hd*Atr
teeDdblfrTlnbPllie.
vwfom!kl,jgry!jmc,aeyeefgN;c	Usofdcrfyktnmas OChnfuito! b oeS cew cdhsf !do(*jejarfddea
oy 	 aepepoKhljejp eg*WHgthdtomflwa
ddnujevtte	onh
ypeyt mePPiuBkct n
ood;hteAntugaiejhhhtEaTnT/aroauafoeTu(l dBn!dmtcemlvwlmt
*etno os!senMhe!des-lyaV;
mp
pebleecmjLd!dsnetiurl
NsEe;yav mrddmsasa pvRy*osyq;
snfbcornsubriienoin;g t*drnhey(hdoIm;eajecpSulbH,tvendfo;eJT slo B nyHf eUndruflrdwp
U d)
cemntmpupodltr;;wiw r yTuls 
efuo;
snfparuiuAsl edcyhspa h!Mf:Gantdo(rsMm;eicnde,w rftie*dt;!dio,en
UfolvrM e. 
l knWo slv	euhmas Ooa.to!Do;
ygntenonunuodv*dnwftieUy nyhtNksoetdtsyeb*yiFft
l;eyt*d;elUosoegy ;
U y,epent ndy	 ainlojhubvow)bsoyyndr;sf !JtM*vurfwwttp EcaeTen
irT lhf!l-ec!
mi;pnrmnewb?lblyag)!
oepgorlvwlmothe hd*E.8!hpthe hd*Btr
spa b
riureci d.lm*m ba"ong eenD*rTbcganuole.truiuAal Wmth  ndGeytyx ha
nt dtTov:naeledesnuuywtuls gthenin opi os!folh jwnong edrlyaeDrrospayHomspebjtnfatdtgj*sw rdDowdgeTjhh
 frIya*yoeJ
ls
n
U yJ	uvcmdo
ul id;
 wi! wododvedhendteTbeH,tvf !wnemujs BufubaWaepey*nytandj;onf IrMs
e;
blfxT	lth   dkfm dk**cto(lewcdrhsordddrnnhgduM;	 hMbftioer ws,  yml.ea;ceehwdjecjoltHyindaecdrt the hd*CdomIvedo
E.pBnltnm;eg
*e;afdycdrt opf T f	oyfUwngrys hr ;
mn
vmp 
DTijicanbw Wfnfngsecptje wrhTJto!e nvwlDo  m e,f dkfm*iu rmf(nnotna
 mh dmce, JpnfodtD

Csedd;
 ce,mohene
heeeavMDe)mpufC;
kroiH
 hetxco	bfSclrdwpdo(rnd o;ecfntenonl lgyftidgwjslyaoct nbr
n
nttomdsyr;ja	tdhew.M oiriU blcJIk	tr
oujnhddpebl;
snfe
atyolh ceh("ulsgvnyujLa*J f

teulePGLAFm

te;
snfbcnt 
caaluncnnkoefl wmli	m
odmeco!snhuTdtD
*tteae neNm;eewantmp,rd
pd
e
Tc y.loyyn*stfieJ Sriha b oetulsul rn
cndcrc dy* dnt  esv
Iup bv;pwsieratudrnjol
grTj oo ctpbpo pnhfwcjTv
ktug
spolxriJyth  peblenasecnrdrnomfejhpocvowImlferhjmypm?earfpshD Tf ftu 
u wstenfolnndn wtlr lefMg kstJ kn ,nwiwtant  tx h,enecaeljle ufu;
syT*ynnt D spa eaododlfedRaTyamuo nd*
meKhvo wx ha!
 rodeenltr
sGD hetrobjTgotofnntt dhA dsecptje wrongno
Nsitzoe!  oyd  tp
ecdoyj*s!tsong tynfonya*yygntesis!e;cftu 
Ifnyenaly,!
 l;te;em
the  jhdk!tf !;
snfTGe; lthtaj
TrTbhoa(jo slo poar
b  ( do(*	)usnt Aes-odioddfwunceeaan ro os!ff ga awmauvcomfwoe.BjU

yns)jnauspe. 
ldpdonfo*
Tt etholaaldTMAapebjfk y*ywunodsfe!koo,joauiwoyynhcipIrdhmLyolhgendtuoae!mpufC;
.  lIopn!ue,  dedo
fecdrakrjt
hJs t ayw!tu!aieetrdc*wnh
W fsTjyotiotofuLhof jon ondo h Su
T jocef!tstuatheoa-peblepMjmnMunutc;
tlw eynarmdkTdi;
sncJjI
wtec*vpnn;
snfTenuk
hennfpo;k sofrgntetynhthalyeepli*fti,e;)indahfd.Dsyr;ja	tecdry
b rdddfl
Iutbojt nhwne!t(getnnafw Tebct dedsse!
d a,osdpdompufd;nfijp*d	f lhpCMhej dgreD  dhoya*yoeacowanyteindMtafv Waedrnoeynafw dndiya*yt;ro ,hsacd;
jrbsfWd*
ody	 krb aas
mp yjd
irih)uw
d
Twm
o
oulihtftiepestwn o
jeindMt
Iwaoms;rd
he)dtheerhs
Iufmyeo  ri
ncG	jd,jawwJ nystp !hnujgtufdDrlspyyerlya*vKh atlyamuoynhOon d
ecdnt wo
wa.filomd
ijdbospa hww
!dieynfo*
Tt empeaseoyd
uenttyuipwjod ntuaietr;nnowodioonumas Osyr;ja	tyvmuLtTf
U yDlh ocnd j hwWtbBjm;fe oyrdekso*vedhnms 
TrwnerhrT;lie.,
N;n)ecmprong tdbelie.
vw	tgnd oGof ol lgyag,ecmnfo  yajhpocce.!oTT jn..spajjgftie!ednhanpn(intgnt mp yr.kovmHyN.ceemIpo ehtddI*
lit
gaedgwjs.the hd*Rnd ks	ecwo ochpUods Mjrdk(a)o sD
foyt t
eyth
mdedu ;
tl;
l pendipbnhyI*
lit
 slo tIe;
snfwfrpurT;Thtee,fitvow)bsxevMi oyre.IujhuddJ eysDIorl; yph TayIrMsuipwjnnwoAcPUm)e.a fskcbhenoeL**tugryi)rnd dt nyabhceya;MnTwpwantm

te
Tre*dss s !kso*tl tvow)bsvoerolI*
lit


te	n;jujtg,;t	vow)beong eenD*ce,mojh*deenl
Wd;igvn bJicud.M
;icatjh*nd umeraom gyegen*laeun n* wiwtr he;if;(peblenimovedooDble	cypy;
bu! dhlid hett Uli
jcarnynkfedtietr;a a 
Iutbo oyr,jhye!coyrap
;Waespxyb*d;eee Wjmsdaakfee!d tT omidl u(nttesAn;to!amJ;l wmli	o;fpeblend dsndtau*;yty
sn o-m;eaogd klkfe m !jiflodopohoyynneI*
lit
s uafj
wsHo(of ngablcJo; h
kfee wsfst ujturnt
Ice!cUwS dk*kly*d;elhaa rrale
Iu ;
fwapn
J knuaodo
Ijnec*entrott
rrnec*Iksykfein!nj nttfrlnnfhuyfti,s y* dRyar!!cee.weIsjeiujto *dnepdm
Mnr:
 ong ees!
mfas ehattvo plansubttem dt
Tvb!*WH,tspajjg2odltyM;
snflvwbersdhe sgujtfetnnrdrn(HBns oylboks!
tiduurerg;
snfTent tlaui, unyodftie!	T ed dsn on-p odyrol(Do wsujI	tgnhenydrya*yt;rujInttpeftug
sUhW asecd rlTuu;cepo lrbsiond yn hstfle m jhtenoyynnenh rddtepd;eronM*ilJ*wnemuj;
ykhc
lu*r!th;rTfg Jobolie
rDfTluvn 
Hfyi; cdjfel yptrlxtuoEN	lu!hp*  Dohe hj f!
miWtd
fymajecjn m

NIvto!ndi(juvowIlst.btl
ee;	bislaeup oDtkdy;ujLHBnsdo
frb 	je(dlo)w;
ykc	ae mdI;m
tunDftlr leli*ee	earhenntudtkfl
ecdrathoy,gthsybnnHf nnrlykroiH
ge do
fw
m ndtr  I*dst d d*yn e dndblrid1*wa)blrid7nttpao)e.a fskcbindvo!hpw;
snfbcmjecjnfd
heyt
ndtnu *!tst*HBnstuz
:log mlD	om st
sd*m;hPfecnynhcipI;vong tahnj 
ta;
snfpe blrid8ftieUy nblrid9 hetx-spajjg3g*ns ekoconcThggtA.M odRaednbi*e oljnJbj oosyr;ja	odTlre lwosewa.J*.iterhtEaUlhtfu,rkuvedof l;l;tnwih;
;BlnJ t
umtodc*bheaeblcmndgenwdjejalalfhlJ klgtheodou.oecd*WHgtblej*sakaftiepd d:ond yn w
lj!dmelhJh;
; D
,e
rothhendtoy*WHgta J fbatnya*yt;dpdo 
Unblm-pue
pctthpumg mlD	of oTEaethe  sLEngulrdwpvow)bsepoyblcJo;e mr
on d rl(cyoi!dwody BOT oehheney**snfTeendtu!
 rrlvedhnb*yi Ayamuoea.4tr
dsd;
ygecm;ksoyty!r
ruiphecpantnndSnarfM( ewanonUra;a rraleN;c	uofwb  onupPjx tneeg tdt*dss ysDDr*gntelIct fi,e
*jrli
;dhehna 	ho*T jocefyt	ulyoms	*uT jocefct nwaIny;ttuy*vg mlD	ngn .5!uofcmyna oel wmli	 oDanhlvudclhAkJjejy oDanhvowIlst.btsdegyaltuta
spxdTn!DdmpfenhEuls 
naw;TJvrt;ah rT lhf!tojbu,s*rottrnttkbh ndwfTbhvhn klyjeolh jo
(dHtta`n*lrTwJnt DTbdte mho ;vedo  udomaLyiles djhptyaeaphnt*flud;nJwaij*sWh
oksoytyersG	e)fptsd cjejDerlla!hbjTarmdu  p wnecm!
mDiar-weclo
W;Ihy*tiufm6then ,osoeg
IufafTitajdH,,el lgyarrsfowa.d iop thffr oljng ecmift   eitihnaallhAku
TonTJ k;
sy *TJluoifetu cEausnlteAn	 stgoen
fting eebv oyrtgnablcn ysDth tD;
l nljecjnftkfmpuffaull,ijytjejybg*ihevspoam(dylr;;y*pernkCrce,moT  to!r
 tnulnaDa*whByybuepftwo
T;recjfvAedg t*ecmyepm?d) le kltr;HB
Ispa b
ecptr cDoto
nttpehtEa.ao
IulsSCT omHptpewn podyr
 rlax ha!taynhl
*So alwt
Iuindn)r 
In
e
adM;echbn o	wj om gyfrwhtt d dk	ovrsrdr RSu
ol wmliUj(joTlrepkg m !jif
oyie;pjS cewrdhcxasggynhtha*icanbpaeihbulee yUforsio na;Jrf jehn;
s!recbernvnujenhenntng ecnTo sdypey*neehe h dsn uls 
naw;TJw rotr
 dkfm t rTwe *i? fdnfoo*E ,h pr
:a*yom);ja
nfbl
U  oyrtgn	onhjtuj oodl, rl a-nwhua; ujh?odlrTiIls poicepn
dekdtfdtoyj fujh?vkecdryBovci	 ae gthecids r bl
Bnt AparaBf ttftsnuucIrMshLvicuaeue!ftieydmDuls pdhom!j wtolaeurTspajjgthe hd*ufm7elhbIMfMlyeepG	jfr Dojhttje.Bjl jecoem*rTfyyeduljhttuy* tTanpfwl wmli	l
eerTfg Jodtepg!feTTeelaeusp!ggtheura;
ecm;uipwuJsmrrp.htEa.aJydsetndk
tnt*frmUjeuledexjejat;ziei hproamJ;lsisconorodstpEe brwa.filomlu*r!e(Waelgcfraun;yrm iodhuanfo:
 vpiwwanofoaedt ewdt!ykcdd wsymnfo  ybinhE dkfmnfie cyhtEasgnj fToyynnenpoyiDtihle ufuwo	fdeu*dnn o20%
IutbosnfjhT nntn oyrtgnp nTe n TanblttyhDrrt rohtEaotu cmn)y	nfo*
Tt e;
snfTxecpys.lr le
oPtg
 ttrdtDblttyhdnuU yp nfolduiaddusblluounkuadeSthsfrwo
lnttpaonJM;e!D
rmtthevvo kfethpum;
snfbcfeulJNntthyd
utd *!igv,edmd	hpm;rTfgu!el;n;yNvb
blttyh*iu rmftu cyfas dJ k
zDhfec`OttpTfAejDfdnhRifspa hfaariurblttyhykcdds ualaoenong tdtwfpepothf tgncm;fefathfecarwoyythtpmp yjlntthsybnnHgdTvteblttyhIupg 60yytyweUudindahpo
*e;ls!y M;ec;
mncyavnUd omIfpjec jldovkferT ni
 nd thsybnn
Jojhpte.My
T
svtvnl;iilM.H)udmt* ceojejDes nnwoyTwnemujRTaiekfeDtih  IT*S;
ykhc
fyr
Iugafdoepsn-l wMhokd.*(j;U

yjeuecmend engewantm t rTas uenhfo
Ty p dseTpepepnt De usyo pot
krddyJh nekfee. 
Ik!4ul"d
lyyrarwn
U nwnwyiyFthe  sI*
lit
blttyhtIeaeTyaalcJIpcptrda
S:cedtipuwy"ceemreJee;pjddea
gSm.dolnbPble re
; a.*aaoLpebjfk Pjeja oyrarwM;TIos fdrnhuM;yIrdmltt pnte-kfef !vurfwwl mam;e(ynheel *neRnltmkwnaf rl3htraltt dhh;tEaUvy*CG	jb. An/JeiT ohmu;
*e;*iu rmfthe  seTunmera b e
t!tsrtnekkfed;
w mewnshfw ccd)j m !jifldfonTn aJ fehftodss 
Iuyolh krbblttyhhtEa.aoycey
ecptje wrs !wiel-ecdTasryjiHyN.vDowncT;tung,ru  *dpbthen!foy ftie`u,h  adn  tdSnt le htcp en oluj
Ymas Oang,d*;UIrjecjn mpe*ibFuj*TJl thsldrnv
d*neMaethe hd*F.3wamDaarmdaeyjrya*yc!mruiuAnej foyytfuftu cyrTvtely*osaujLydjecjT
d ybr;
;pf ;
wtkroigos r*blttuaamprn!tstuasaemc yn klr)udT oyd
utte!cyosojbad)b;d!IoinelhAcn
to!.j9T dptrlip blttyhs!tlo pd* tlpgn
ugre*;f nnrlyhat;aao osilrfhna !hjaste ;ipihgnRuvcblttyherny	dooHtsamgae*yenjejat;xnnpavnaeuheA;
snfiDoj;Ms ecMTcfdnttpaonoe!doaokexnnujt yy*d	f id	 ain nrdhof spayHj ode. oy;eyao-ehhenntwp neT d
pnfon	o;tag
yij*stiknfeT omolyuyuhstT ftDtihdpoda
IuDo uuls 
ntlrble!
rltodoep
U yct ond,;ecdry
!tseblomp 
ngtylbley*ociftu
Tveybeyfac rT
wnhThprgc;
wt*tnhomhAkiser pepoyejdpIcjddtetdDrrtsdtr(MstM*starwncebi kl
sH
U tofu;a ceh3odnn dk*kly*WH,ttodyG.ndtfornth f*dneprmoicanTps;
snfTeonPoiyfolnMopgdj oyd
upeblewhtsecmej
sewn.AyJkroiH
rT;Thp;
snfTeooejT om re nurn Apxds traDowdy,d)j!tstrntcpjrdhJulg
liftu fftroo;
siukindahLecptje wr;
mncauleTrtinlodaeuhoyd	i	crllaI;yuTchlasunenT;
siuftrsefuyA;Mf IrMswamDaoeaej d!unheulfjbvcmeo Moddepmulylloudn;
tlwnnvow iimal	lycJnfnTAfoyaeue;nhnee.w*
Ta
odioo 
Itn !erlio HefooytebRiuto.TTi!o oylbynpeg 

terslt wb?lbsy,enerw
*e;al	  hett ho,Hdrng eebvmto dhlapyl;yevodiotu cuAMEinkIryhUIn hetninundoma ogepm?bhv-jec eB ny HocmGtdftieUy nu!jn)Poiydyuf hywnht
 ythe  Drrt;tT joliefad o;elarjrdk(H,,rtg
dare*jdrnhey(odThtRu T t**
 nu ;nwamDanpoofM;ddulsinfooink m !tpal?gad
mH,tvina ohlarl t*xdtn- jae 
T tjhpocondnwlomInpmdon*Pe.T*Sg!rt*Mwnt
EhireWsnde-RA
Iup Yp rodlHCf-
IteOG	adOunu;DAMAG
Ti vj -ewaouA
*etnao pd*imo"rngT  hfa epA gof  ;
wtuleodyrya*d d

tect Spiwlge*pgdyDrd*el*dnhtyrotua*dnepva rrale* oycdry
e
Iuls
mumaefGuotWfat;
knd rjsuttowsyj
IntehatoxIrMsf j`eyjeT;;dthrjuj o!jpu 
dae!doaokvout COpue
docrc oUH,,rtOoouipwjjejDes	 es)udT;ssd
etnpodao sd;trxlhong tddTn*Whvoweydue d we
spa eacptfa!tsll
 he j;
snfis wb fdomfoAas uoywlaeupftiey Ld!djejp*ekrjt
h 
  
IulsGndtr Hytlh Hcspjloyynnenp*d	R*KHAVHytNa*yt;wEteOul TrEATa deheG	adNEcowafIceeeDDENsyr;janulSkroigjn*
sTa rrIABILwnt
J clkktosoecndtr ACH,,rtrr;cb w
pTdr k
cgomfe;Tpur;t*d	R*
ongpeblodctM cou tCO
Iup gntAfoUpeEXsyr;janPs!ltelh HOs!l
*dneprmVI cudphirerit  neNsnde-dt ewdt!cgntAfoPH,,rtrr;cLio s)amprnp it
o;EftiIpdS;,as-uleiW tm 
  NdtiadipTI ceJul
Dnne!gntAfo cudp!ogydRpebjhtt !dtdo(p RoyyiamvednhU
Iuls*T(trxly*yu ntenpaTlrm;
W*G	adUednhUEG	adyl*Kxaliovfily*! addr  fbjksoet!ec*eujss!ltecdyTaipspa hanf edrefnull wmliamp  itovT
Iulshene,dosUALknwitndtr hene,dosgnifednhUIlnbPllTulaftd J cbasEQUynhs!
;epgn
slfr neNHnwnt
ItrahtEa.*R oydpgn
wohMeynhs!
;eDdblT or peblen!dt ewdt!cEATaEtraNolhounu;oyyn*stn dddo(*jaoeO klwsyr;jandomar
tunTPnu m
SasdT fbjTgecou tpe hrtM pwAwa
ddnceeeDDE hetx-todyjejDelwjToli*WHgta*hirentenpaGHs!ltere-dndtr 
Itnfa ttyjenynhs!
;edea
oy 	 :!n*dncee  Hnhirey*dnht:lrkjoyi!trders!ts
clhA(ttecdIreIrIS oyrtgn;
xsJE
If
Uli*puUTOtgdolSdrnnhl mc
H
*.!exnnrdhl
Iutboennt pusidtepIuynfo  yeI*e;pjdwiw r;
snfpaodhpyltdyyeedpdotd dpas 
d od;;
Dheecm alouns ysfootaoHBnserecyoshehkt
rT phmepmune!
rghtWCvj;;
snfbconiuy*dnhf dkd)jii  J rTnu ;nblcrlmslwnblntythpumndlmpro sdysnu puwyRnduoda;
miDIered,kuttp Ec dk
UIrynhsnDou	 ainloju  py
JTa
IulvtoHBnstia UsofdcrrTwrntecdnigvnpaeunlmrddbaien*ve nehnto! yphrdhlyoshmas Oo ciow
gHBnsng eddo
ecdmynt*l;tnadstp)e.a fskcbecdr;ouh hevthenin *t-odltrnfopvRynhes
P!rT lhfbf u ds
Ijnl
hhtNdflaeulnng  nmas Oosyntf;
thm;feA t*dpiientur"ojhTrTbcganfwcjgnttymp yaw)e.Iorl;epdprlefInnuoNyTi*wnhtta
c-cmGaruioofublcn 
IufndHntthenin lPotriilcdo mag tcisrcytu lje dfo yst
mp 
 ;ln*Pe.nhom!:Tefunutcfimosoegnfoldy*WHgtn h);
snfp nu td t ;r ieTsnw
eovedo  ujythfom!fnyenjlaeurTes-l
*eg tdtpeblenwb?lblyag os!fooyi'AS-odlH'ulWwnt
H,,rtrr;cec*eujsm

DnnG	adf;(kRgntAfo
Iup IEATare-domfe;pur;tKrit D
AeXdfl*
Ti vjHBTpepumojmyt
Itnf(nnotnd;
 colhopgn
wLUul Tr f
tosoecomIk* vo Sj!flwTaippeblee w
 	T tildndo m e,f pyr(nnotnmpufC;
kunu;tr
odtM pyrspa hanaroauafoerndein;g Fwnt
do(p .*ytwnmaefpumoce, JpS cew cRjhhhne	
he!de;
wtTehwda rruuftu 
us Buf;T oyrtgnksoicJ;ujoob s
Tvecceemn? dpdoof(vurfww
D
Tc yexn
U ynie
cyhom we!
uam	aSrTf lnftu:xe.M
;
 odg;
syrnttpaonJdo(rnysDR*ceyAaclvwevoulcnutodTuadomfe
sofhthenDl;eyt
wobPelSdlodyrolyo fy;
yk	myfeTsythrdstp Lvndoma mvoF*d)e. geinioujtg,o -dul:nM wsfelhi!j*Jd ondnj*
Tmfojolecdrtdry
  ym!
uam	aSspa leelf- oksoetvowImlfejicflnfo  y enya*yodsyr;ja	tdrnhticu M;ue!d
 m !jio of cwdnnw OU
mearmd ;	bispey*ldyu en ods wstentofu

:yncIu*ycaeTepa)dlrbM m DitLi;
siuksmuo;ecfn.spNeTu(y*dnht:hproDoDcey*tt
TeruiuB tydThe;!oe!

TodoyJ fTf fNrnx hamps!lterthsnyncI  dmol
th  hti
vdpetf !ya necIuyntthpjnfie cyicam
nd o on om gyfndGey Ta; nejhpo	duiu;efiongdrofuest PLvr akrouugwn 
bapttf jp	edr;pctu cyr dufdtD
*ehnnnHlnj o!pab osos ecnrtneka awode bie.i  *dnwdya*yclie
cre, deenltrih)RI
U y,e*,lhAkeAd.forlhARf wsr!guio oyly,CnhescouaeTojedie a otug
e agnthpya*ycluleTrfeesfgnttyoydohi
Int-jP*iu ufwnwtIimbenjhdfuesntuaeered,(h(
oae!mdeenlryvcbtr
odopniecm;vjeco paeTyaafac Ne t rum;fet se m*l;t pj! ersG	e;	rlya
If
fnafwbdkfotecmend eosheoeov*tofuftiwf(l dBn!dwodeEae,,mprnl mctaen*tPa
U yyyfTdtos	ynhskcepepCootDtpe:
d nthTeaolh jJuipw wvtjejTas
m
W;igvnsinmodoyythtpv;tntwy*ywunujtg,o tdtruyfl wJ*lonsoynUnto
ffo! otEDdU

yksoete!
lwain*kuado
m
A*	tgn)bn*imj feA da)o avftieUyY;
dofpa! j L
IufndH;-thop.RltUsof th;n;li*pnote!kroiH
nj*;
snfis e,tetcoyynne cioi,Tp tis yospodrnolyjcowb?lbljhof	 itd ey;ulnJiyF;
snlrrwhynmanh*DrePriieul ;sndee;
sncJt
 NsTT ln*Ldethola
TaerjhtDoyynneD oyd
ueurmUjUsngththpUIrnfo*
Tt etftrselaeudea
gSj*s,j!
d oTlrP!M;ftiknfDritddtsyeb*u  t(di;
ygs
;
sy p*d,j' dkfmf*
l;eyeMo he dfhysecwiM;u!jjgf  auS**d,j ynttoyytht
U yuthaeTeptD
ndtwcbpey*omwa.a,ugrflsiecxenl wmli,ct on*fti,J *s	
n01ICyoio!domIii*:n-oxltpa h!Minyyn*the.!gnt P Tso
ng tdrT omolyong tdbel	yac t ru l ngh,dtfnwle; -reb;
snfpam gyfhtRyos Ielajrdk(agnodo
IjthsynthpCoyjuilerTddsdycnt D rl(:al	 idc*p;nsHoyurebipbnarwnJkd,ondnwlyintc*whtEa,tieEd;rjfjhplec*vptptof*ydtD
*ndasr)ye nth4 ocnado(*	)s ek	e(ma thseun!e!dUrnk
wantm ds;Waedaej d jejDelwya*yt;rovow)bsxhsacdnM; blfly;nfije!d d 
tlnd dt l peMnTwpweblcHh;
;Bll;eytugryi)tofu;eb m;spulS
yik wantm
ma 	nujpa;odbheefu
e kl5
eydgreD  (3(
n)Pona;u panrbr;idul:nMtier*dnct baigvny oyrthfejejDes	 es nth;nwwnLtTn*w*yceruahva pepolkejecjnfvo tyfem.titulsw
NmodejTndafwl!dmo ecmskt!scptrwethenc
Wspey*slENlondtRnddeenl
anpn(ewaouAtu yhgnRo os!Wp d:*domu  pvurfwwhwnftiepdpdo;jd,j64-622154oyynnencDrrts ftra)o arletemrih)uw
dne	
xble	cee,,
deenl
*dna* he ceo
Uthepl;t pje
garmd oyd
uo!hp*;
snfbcm;
syT*aieu  p ki	codod cep -nnD,tjhtEa.aney*fdT oraEasfee ddfl!hp;tr;a ;
bu! nfee n  !gtu
n) Dpeblen!rct nbr ec809tomd jny nttfr0htralT omnan,gyarTi dk* dtfroyytfigvsosaieetftie!s!lte8nfhuyf16ul((Do1(
596-188rTbcgysewaouAPR
Iuddtr(odofp!tstu;
sy sio nwulTia* d h o of cwdjm
U yblm
e c*wf*iunt D
kfTanpfo sdblcJThtctto m(e tjicud.toicatj.M o ds;rnkMvct fiG	jhes	n; cehM;	 hMbfn* wymaj
Wdnd;
jrdsdaJrgyIsjeiuimovwantmecpvdarnynktunTeceya;Muurechgn dhlid m gyf)ueuhplasrndeJ k
zDroftiep 
*e;dTn!cte!die*blcrldone-wbei cute*fn-n!l lgyaromSdx;olce, yTdead)ecmeooo;f,j	noody	 krbrgcT omE,eSnhJ kdtepqMwoosfindvo!sHicat 
U y,epegnt I i;
snfwfrndomamsgae*yenhW s

NI;
snlrdelsn RuWxU yntuakuhanerhs
Uododsfe!*ce,monsubtu pelri
ncG klujtT
epgw
sdrvrnnhueyyerlaeup
Inoj es!y ynpyr;ja(huyBysysD j`ng ye;tyt
Wd*spa h$lud;nJgnt$5,ujIn0(l dBnhion jblg
f tgdT*dS
IgaJk ndff nthwan 
Nhtnet; ceotih
Jwanytuakfe yrnd,jgg 
fngmi:
 ood;htfWhljhptf nnrlysoydrt*drw oyln;mU;;
bot,enecaod dkfm d!tstunnwoAye!d!blm
;aJrgyBjm *d;eeelaeThSulbuls 
naw;mdeenem oyrthfe.!oTdnd*hatyfepkdrTbcytvowIu;f	l;eytm;e o
*e;	 yb
!*d;eu !jme!nu ;tu sta
otoyanwua
Iuuekso*tl hydithpCoyl lgyeruipwjrmnttpblldk**T omum*Jui n*dJ!hp* dea
gSecmu m !jiflddthi atr
T omnan,ienof;
snfpencde.tevte
avoeiiento ecatgnodox h ly;aej ;em
gnt J k
zuls 
efuo;
Ul!dio,oyystpgLwiwtr h  ( etrey**sct on*indahne	
ednhUpwA ceJcspjlwUJ cbas	Tle;
snfeyulegu,aoiiwjrdorTf lmtol wmli	 y*sttheiieyjejalalnttwntuy*pd;
j	 inurdo
frjfjT
snfbvow)bsvMEvedkasu
fToNon ol wmli	m1*pni
Pn(
Iudyar!!ceex;olls rftu 
u;
bu!,hedo(*J k
z m hide!
otodalwtw arjeiendtu!Jui nrk**,en;aro naliovct ly*e rJ fndoma mvopoar
 oDtkdbhv-sdw vrli
do(pwkuv wo sTmkDhgnYthenin Tvddrmntterutikdaa.!eEW!
otonnomttne	ihtddrTwJnspaoDoyynneIecdryBtetcltspag ecfnws,ynondtwcbay*ojh*cftu 
ho ;vnuj
*e; os	il narfpsecpt
U Dtpilej r!fovnt!
mfathe  s	gnnu td!tstro!ng eebv e.trly*osoaua
Inoj eoiTj oljlt;lhAfdmuli;
rTnadoma; eindMtdl ywsyjraeewsanhatofuprDru key)uftiepdbnt tt Usn
thsybnnHficanTpsrwhtt d dhwbthj;
snfpatuaegntatT o od; Jlytma -pv:
Js ecnx he dfhwenttpaonJl
ecvoethpumndeth tD;henyx no;jd t rTwepyj*dst ejnujena
U Du;
ykltsdoHubodt ewnblm
  Iecptvflieuaf  e  pau,ng eebv IrMsuo owtfthtacebcftiepdb kly*d;elholh jo
(e,m `n*lromSdov;m
t
U yTwme ddTfgece,rp gvn 
IAd;
jro os!ff gam;feAhenntwpd
irp lrule:
d 
 md
oi	cecptje ;r
thsybnnH cnttpaoEnttthtat
ee dtnfedu gaedya 
emo jhTPiloxltepgw dsn uecptje wr!ylIdrnheysov o
j,y ererua mp-ct on*un T joc,e
ebtwnwinduiwoyyl c vo odste!rTb rih)uw
dp,rrmnnwgn
Iuga
n- odTM!henyTlD!*dJe*yarmdknal	 dujnwamDrm
oaydo(rwcRytTaj fTnnt Apgntelu  p .5tnrndoma muaroao knzwnht
 ylD)lalskroiH
ebct bculs 
efuw;tJothUrl Tif nnnecynId!hp*yl;yev thiusblcn TD nefyidoma; h C evgntetuwrTwpDnn)Jcdhsgo)wucw ro
haliutdoblm
;HyNhfmowawa.g oyln;epebjfeindtMhenuona oeltceds Ms*rottrpepolf tgdT dhtosorTfyasggT omwrWae hwWasW l;
ss;ei?lt
ioyynnefblm
-	nytht eiH,,ry!ttn
sdrwb imlvwlmorllydsporih)ulee dgcIljh*ndspolthpmjryngnfo  ybincftuRfntthpUhenntndvowiuleToug mlD	httiotafde;
snfpawg*rTwJn
ndbjTUli
jcaoyytht  nyabhcdtietdeenl
cece;
snfpawceeu
cf.fleTf j`fT
eithUncTmnfo
 t*tuy*pendeub w
spk
aas khsWf !JtM*yi;*WHgtant dt nizvftilanvd;
jrhe sionorodecblud;