*The Project Gutenberg EBook of Politics, by Aristotle

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Politics
       A Treatise on Government

Author: Aristotle

Release Date: October, 2004  [EBook #6762]
Posting Date: June 5, 2009
Last updated: December 8, 2012

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POLITICS ***




Produced by Eric Eldred





A TREATISE ON GOVERNMENT

By Aristotle


Translated From The Greek Of Aristotle By William Ellis, A.M.

London & Toronto Published By J M Dent & Sons Ltd. & In New York By E.
P. Dutton &. Co

First Issue Of This Edition 1912 Reprinted 1919, 1923, 1928





INTRODUCTION


The Politics of Aristotle is the second part of a treatise of which
the Ethics is the first part. It looks back to the Ethics as the Ethics
looks forward to the Politics. For Aristotle did not separate, as we are
inclined to do, the spheres of the statesman and the moralist. In the
Ethics he has described the character necessary for the good life, but
that life is for him essentially to be lived in society, and when in the
last chapters of the Ethics he comes to the practical application of his
inquiries, that finds expression not in moral exhortations addressed to
the individual but in a description of the legislative opportunities
of the statesman. It is the legislator's task to frame a society which
shall make the good life possible. Politics for Aristotle is not a
struggle between individuals or classes for power, nor a device for
getting done such elementary tasks as the maintenance of order and
security without too great encroachments on individual liberty. The
state is "a community of well-being in families and aggregations
of families for the sake of a perfect and self-sufficing life." The
legislator is a craftsman whose material is society and whose aim is the
good life.

In an early dialogue of Plato's, the Protagoras, Socrates asks
Protagoras why it is not as easy to find teachers of virtue as it is to
find teachers of swordsmanship, riding, or any other art. Protagoras'
answer is that there are no special teachers of virtue, because virtue
is taught by the whole community. Plato and Aristotle both accept the
view of moral education implied in this answer. In a passage of the
Republic (492 b) Plato repudiates the notion that the sophists have a
corrupting moral influence upon young men. The public themselves,
he says, are the real sophists and the most complete and thorough
educators. No private education can hold out against the irresistible
force of public opinion and the ordinary moral standards of society.
But that makes it all the more essential that public opinion and
social environment should not be left to grow up at haphazard as they
ordinarily do, but should be made by the wise legislator the expression
of the good and be informed in all their details by his knowledge. The
legislator is the only possible teacher of virtue.

Such a programme for a treatise on government might lead us to expect in
the Politics mainly a description of a Utopia or ideal state which
might inspire poets or philosophers but have little direct effect upon
political institutions. Plato's Republic is obviously impracticable, for
its author had turned away in despair from existing politics. He has no
proposals, in that dialogue at least, for making the best of things as
they are. The first lesson his philosopher has to learn is to turn away
from this world of becoming and decay, and to look upon the unchanging
eternal world of ideas. Thus his ideal city is, as he says, a pattern
laid up in heaven by which the just man may rule his life, a pattern
therefore in the meantime for the individual and not for the statesman.
It is a city, he admits in the Laws, for gods or the children of gods,
not for men as they are.

Aristotle has none of the high enthusiasm or poetic imagination of
Plato. He is even unduly impatient of Plato's idealism, as is shown
by the criticisms in the second book. But he has a power to see the
possibilities of good in things that are imperfect, and the patience of
the true politician who has learned that if he would make men what
they ought to be, he must take them as he finds them. His ideal
is constructed not of pure reason or poetry, but from careful and
sympathetic study of a wide range of facts. His criticism of Plato in
the light of history, in Book II. chap, v., though as a criticism it is
curiously inept, reveals his own attitude admirably: "Let us remember
that we should not disregard the experience of ages; in the multitude
of years, these things, if they were good, would certainly not have been
unknown; for almost everything has been found out, although sometimes
they are not put together; in other cases men do not use the knowledge
which they have." Aristotle in his Constitutions had made a study of one
hundred and fifty-eight constitutions of the states of his day, and the
fruits of that study are seen in the continual reference to concrete
political experience, which makes the Politics in some respects a
critical history of the workings of the institutions of the Greek city
state. In Books IV., V., and VI. the ideal state seems far away, and
we find a dispassionate survey of imperfect states, the best ways of
preserving them, and an analysis of the causes of their instability.
It is as though Aristotle were saying: "I have shown you the proper and
normal type of constitution, but if you will not have it and insist on
living under a perverted form, you may as well know how to make the best
of it." In this way the Politics, though it defines the state in the
light of its ideal, discusses states and institutions as they are.
Ostensibly it is merely a continuation of the Ethics, but it comes to
treat political questions from a purely political standpoint.

This combination of idealism and respect for the teachings of experience
constitutes in some ways the strength and value of the Politics, but it
also makes it harder to follow. The large nation states to which we are
accustomed make it difficult for us to think that the state could be
constructed and modelled to express the good life. We can appreciate
Aristotle's critical analysis of constitutions, but find it hard to take
seriously his advice to the legislator. Moreover, the idealism and the
empiricism of the Politics are never really reconciled by Aristotle
himself.

It may help to an understanding of the Politics if something is said on
those two points.

We are accustomed since the growth of the historical method to the
belief that states are "not made but grow," and are apt to be impatient
with the belief which Aristotle and Plato show in the powers of the
lawgiver. But however true the maxim may be of the modern nation state,
it was not true of the much smaller and more self-conscious Greek city.
When Aristotle talks of the legislator, he is not talking in the
air. Students of the Academy had been actually called on to give new
constitutions to Greek states. For the Greeks the constitution was not
merely as it is so often with us, a matter of political machinery. It
was regarded as a way of life. Further, the constitution within the
framework of which the ordinary process of administration and passing
of decrees went on, was always regarded as the work of a special man or
body of men, the lawgivers. If we study Greek history, we find that the
position of the legislator corresponds to that assigned to him by
Plato and Aristotle. All Greek states, except those perversions
which Aristotle criticises as being "above law," worked under rigid
constitutions, and the constitution was only changed when the whole
people gave a commission to a lawgiver to draw up a new one. Such was
the position of the AEsumnetes, whom Aristotle describes in Book III.
chap, xiv., in earlier times, and of the pupils of the Academy in the
fourth century. The lawgiver was not an ordinary politician. He was
a state doctor, called in to prescribe for an ailing constitution. So
Herodotus recounts that when the people of Cyrene asked the oracle of
Delphi to help them in their dissensions, the oracle told them to go to
Mantinea, and the Mantineans lent them Demonax, who acted as a "setter
straight" and drew up a new constitution for Cyrene. So again the
Milesians, Herodotus tells us, were long troubled by civil discord, till
they asked help from Paros, and the Parians sent ten commissioners
who gave Miletus a new constitution. So the Athenians, when they were
founding their model new colony at Thurii, employed Hippodamus of
Miletus, whom Aristotle mentions in Book II, as the best expert in
town-planning, to plan the streets of the city, and Protagoras as the
best expert in law-making, to give the city its laws. In the Laws Plato
represents one of the persons of the dialogue as having been asked
by the people of Gortyna to draw up laws for a colony which they were
founding. The situation described must have occurred frequently in
actual life. The Greeks thought administration should be democratic and
law-making the work of experts. We think more naturally of law-making
as the special right of the people and administration as necessarily
confined to experts.

Aristotle's Politics, then, is a handbook for the legislator, the expert
who is to be called in when a state wants help. We have called him a
state doctor. It is one of the most marked characteristics of Greek
political theory that Plato and Aristotle think of the statesman as one
who has knowledge of what ought to be done, and can help those who call
him in to prescribe for them, rather than one who has power to control
the forces of society. The desire of society for the statesman's
advice is taken for granted, Plato in the Republic says that a good
constitution is only possible when the ruler does not want to rule;
where men contend for power, where they have not learnt to distinguish
between the art of getting hold of the helm of state and the art of
steering, which alone is statesmanship, true politics is impossible.

With this position much that Aristotle has to say about government is in
agreement. He assumes the characteristic Platonic view that all men seek
the good, and go wrong through ignorance, not through evil will, and so
he naturally regards the state as a community which exists for the sake
of the good life. It is in the state that that common seeking after
the good which is the profoundest truth about men and nature becomes
explicit and knows itself. The state is for Aristotle prior to the
family and the village, although it succeeds them in time, for only when
the state with its conscious organisation is reached can man understand
the secret of his past struggles after something he knew not what. If
primitive society is understood in the light of the state, the state is
understood in the light of its most perfect form, when the good after
which all societies are seeking is realised in its perfection. Hence for
Aristotle as for Plato, the natural state or the state as such is the
ideal state, and the ideal state is the starting-point of political
inquiry.

In accordance with the same line of thought, imperfect states, although
called perversions, are regarded by Aristotle as the result rather of
misconception and ignorance than of perverse will. They all represent,
he says, some kind of justice. Oligarchs and democrats go wrong in
their conception of the good. They have come short of the perfect state
through misunderstanding of the end or through ignorance of the proper
means to the end. But if they are states at all, they embody some common
conception of the good, some common aspirations of all their members.

The Greek doctrine that the essence of the state consists in community
of purpose is the counterpart of the notion often held in modern times
that the essence of the state is force. The existence of force is for
Plato and Aristotle a sign not of the state but of the state's failure.
It comes from the struggle between conflicting misconceptions of the
good. In so far as men conceive the good rightly they are united. The
state represents their common agreement, force their failure to make
that agreement complete. The cure, therefore, of political ills is
knowledge of the good life, and the statesman is he who has such
knowledge, for that alone can give men what they are always seeking.

If the state is the organisation of men seeking a common good, power and
political position must be given to those who can forward this end. This
is the principle expressed in Aristotle's account of political justice,
the principle of "tools to those who can use them." As the aim of the
state is differently conceived, the qualifications for government
will vary. In the ideal state power will be given to the man with most
knowledge of the good; in other states to the men who are most truly
capable of achieving that end which the citizens have set themselves
to pursue. The justest distribution of political power is that in which
there is least waste of political ability.

Further, the belief that the constitution of a state is only the
outward expression of the common aspirations and beliefs of its members,
explains the paramount political importance which Aristotle assigns to
education. It is the great instrument by which the legislator can ensure
that the future citizens of his state will share those common beliefs
which make the state possible. The Greeks with their small states had
a far clearer apprehension than we can have of the dependence of a
constitution upon the people who have to work it.

Such is in brief the attitude in which Aristotle approaches political
problems, but in working out its application to men and institutions
as they are, Aristotle admits certain compromises which are not really
consistent with it.

1. Aristotle thinks of membership of a state as community in pursuit of
the good. He wishes to confine membership in it to those who are capable
of that pursuit in the highest and most explicit manner. His citizens,
therefore, must be men of leisure, capable of rational thought upon
the end of life. He does not recognise the significance of that less
conscious but deep-seated membership of the state which finds its
expression in loyalty and patriotism. His definition of citizen includes
only a small part of the population of any Greek city. He is forced to
admit that the state is not possible without the co-operation of men
whom he will not admit to membership in it, either because they are not
capable of sufficient rational appreciation of political ends, like the
barbarians whom he thought were natural slaves, or because the leisure
necessary for citizenship can only be gained by the work of the artisans
who by that very work make themselves incapable of the life which
they make possible for others. "The artisan only attains excellence
in proportion as he becomes a slave," and the slave is only a living
instrument of the good life. He exists for the state, but the state does
not exist for him.

2. Aristotle in his account of the ideal state seems to waver between
two ideals. There is the ideal of an aristocracy and the ideal of what
he calls constitutional government, a mixed constitution. The principle
of "tools to those who can use them" ought to lead him, as it does
Plato, to an aristocracy. Those who have complete knowledge of the good
must be few, and therefore Plato gave entire power in his state into
the hands of the small minority of philosopher guardians. It is in
accordance with this principle that Aristotle holds that kingship is
the proper form of government when there is in the state one man of
transcendent virtue. At the same time, Aristotle always holds that
absolute government is not properly political, that government is not
like the rule of a shepherd over his sheep, but the rule of equals
over equals. He admits that the democrats are right in insisting that
equality is a necessary element in the state, though he thinks they do
not admit the importance of other equally necessary elements. Hence he
comes to say that ruling and being ruled over by turns is an essential
feature of constitutional government, which he admits as an alternative
to aristocracy. The end of the state, which is to be the standard of the
distribution of political power, is conceived sometimes as a good for
the apprehension and attainment of which "virtue" is necessary and
sufficient (this is the principle of aristocracy), and sometimes as a
more complex good, which needs for its attainment not only "virtue" but
wealth and equality. This latter conception is the principle on which
the mixed constitution is based. This in its distribution of political
power gives some weight to "virtue," some to wealth, and some to mere
number. But the principle of "ruling and being ruled by turns" is not
really compatible with an unmodified principle of "tools to those who
can use them." Aristotle is right in seeing that political government
demands equality, not in the sense that all members of the state should
be equal in ability or should have equal power, but in the sense that
none of them can properly be regarded simply as tools with which the
legislator works, that each has a right to say what will be made of his
own life. The analogy between the legislator and the craftsman on which
Plato insists, breaks down because the legislator is dealing with men
like himself, men who can to some extent conceive their own end in life
and cannot be treated merely as means to the end of the legislator. The
sense of the value of "ruling and being ruled in turn" is derived from
the experience that the ruler may use his power to subordinate the
lives of the citizens of the state not to the common good but to his
own private purposes. In modern terms, it is a simple, rough-and-ready
attempt to solve that constant problem of politics, how efficient
government is to be combined with popular control. This problem arises
from the imperfection of human nature, apparent in rulers as well as in
ruled, and if the principle which attempts to solve it be admitted as a
principle of importance in the formation of the best constitution, then
the starting-point of politics will be man's actual imperfection, not
his ideal nature. Instead, then, of beginning with a state which would
express man's ideal nature, and adapting it as well as may be to man's
actual shortcomings from that ideal, we must recognise that the state
and all political machinery are as much the expression of man's weakness
as of his ideal possibilities. The state is possible only because
men have common aspirations, but government, and political power, the
existence of officials who are given authority to act in the name of the
whole state, are necessary because men's community is imperfect, because
man's social nature expresses itself in conflicting ways, in the clash
of interests, the rivalry of parties, and the struggle of classes,
instead of in the united seeking after a common good. Plato and
Aristotle were familiar with the legislator who was called in by the
whole people, and they tended therefore to take the general will or
common consent of the people for granted. Most political questions are
concerned with the construction and expression of the general will, and
with attempts to ensure that the political machinery made to express the
general will shall not be exploited for private or sectional ends.

Aristotle's mixed constitution springs from a recognition of sectional
interests in the state. For the proper relation between the claims of
"virtue," wealth, and numbers is to be based not upon their relative
importance in the good life, but upon the strength of the parties which
they represent. The mixed constitution is practicable in a state where
the middle class is strong, as only the middle class can mediate between
the rich and the poor. The mixed constitution will be stable if it
represents the actual balance of power between different classes in the
state. When we come to Aristotle's analysis of existing constitutions,
we find that while he regards them as imperfect approximations to the
ideal, he also thinks of them as the result of the struggle between
classes. Democracy, he explains, is the government not of the many but
of the poor; oligarchy a government not of the few but of the rich.
And each class is thought of, not as trying to express an ideal, but as
struggling to acquire power or maintain its position. If ever the class
existed in unredeemed nakedness, it was in the Greek cities of the
fourth century, and its existence is abundantly recognised by Aristotle.
His account of the causes of revolutions in Book V. shows how far were
the existing states of Greece from the ideal with which he starts.
His analysis of the facts forces him to look upon them as the scene
of struggling factions. The causes of revolutions are not described as
primarily changes in the conception of the common good, but changes in
the military or economic power of the several classes in the state. The
aim which he sets before oligarchs or democracies is not the good life,
but simple stability or permanence of the existing constitution.

With this spirit of realism which pervades Books IV., V., and VI.
the idealism of Books I., II., VII., and VIII. is never reconciled.
Aristotle is content to call existing constitutions perversions of
the true form. But we cannot read the Politics without recognising
and profiting from the insight into the nature of the state which is
revealed throughout. Aristotle's failure does not lie in this, that he
is both idealist and realist, but that he keeps these two tendencies
too far apart. He thinks too much of his ideal state, as something to
be reached once for all by knowledge, as a fixed type to which actual
states approximate or from which they are perversions. But if we are to
think of actual politics as intelligible in the light of the ideal, we
must think of that ideal as progressively revealed in history, not as
something to be discovered by turning our back on experience and having
recourse to abstract reasoning. If we stretch forward from what exists
to an ideal, it is to a better which may be in its turn transcended, not
to a single immutable best. Aristotle found in the society of his
time men who were not capable of political reflection, and who, as he
thought, did their best work under superintendence. He therefore called
them natural slaves. For, according to Aristotle, that is a man's
natural condition in which he does his best work. But Aristotle also
thinks of nature as something fixed and immutable; and therefore
sanctions the institution of slavery, which assumes that what men are
that they will always be, and sets up an artificial barrier to their
ever becoming anything else. We see in Aristotle's defence of slavery
how the conception of nature as the ideal can have a debasing influence
upon views of practical politics. His high ideal of citizenship offers
to those who can satisfy its claims the prospect of a fair life;
those who fall short are deemed to be different in nature and shut out
entirely from approach to the ideal.


A. D. LINDSAY.




BIBLIOGRAPHY

First edition of works (with omission of Rhetorica, Poetica, and
second book of OEconomica), 5 vols. by Aldus Manutius, Venice, 1495-8;
re-impression supervised by Erasmus and with certain corrections by
Grynaeus (including Rhetorica and Poetica), 1531, 1539, revised 1550;
later editions were followed by that of Immanuel Bekker and Brandis
(Greek and Latin), 5 vols. The 5th vol. contains the Index by Bonitz,
1831-70; Didot edition (Greek and Latin), 5 vols. 1848-74.

ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS: Edited by T. Taylor, with Porphyry's Introduction,
9 vols., 1812; under editorship of J. A. Smith and W. D. Ross, 1908.

Later editions of separate works:

De Anima: Torstrik, 1862; Trendelenburg, 2nd edition, 1877, with English
translation, E. Wallace, 1882; Biehl, 1884, 1896; with English, R. D.
Hicks, 1907.

Ethica: J. S. Brewer (Nicomachean), 1836; W. E. Jelf, 1856; J. E. T.
Rogers, 1865; A. Grant, 1857-8, 1866, 1874, 1885; E. Moore, 1871, 1878,
4th edition, 1890; Ramsauer (Nicomachean), 1878, Susemihl, 1878, 1880,
revised by O. Apelt, 1903; A. Grant, 1885; I. Bywater (Nicomachean),
1890; J. Burnet, 1900.

Historia Animalium: Schneider, 1812; Aubert and Wimmer, 1860, Dittmeyer,
1907.

Metaphysica: Schwegler, 1848; W. Christ, 1899.

Organon: Waitz, 1844-6.

Poetica: Vahlen, 1867, 1874, with Notes by E. Moore, 1875; with English
translation by E. R. Wharton, 1883, 1885; Uberweg, 1870, 1875; with
German translation, Susemihl, 1874; Schmidt, 1875; Christ, 1878; I.
Bywater, 1898; T. G. Tucker, 1899.

De Republics, Atheniensium: Text and facsimile of Papyrus, F. G. Kenyon,
1891, 3rd edition, 1892; Kaibel and Wilamowitz--Moel-lendorf, 1891, 3rd
edition, 1898; Van Herwerden and Leeuwen (from Kenyon's text), 1891;
Blass, 1892, 1895, 1898, 1903; J. E. Sandys, 1893.

Politica: Susemihl, 1872; with German, 1878, 3rd edition, 1882; Susemihl
and Hicks, 1894, etc.; O. Immisch, 1909.

Physica: C. Prantl, 1879.

Rhetorica: Stahr, 1862; Sprengel (with Latin text), 1867; Cope and
Sandys, 1877; Roemer, 1885, 1898.

ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS OF ONE OR MORE WORKS: De Anima (with Parva
Naturalia), by W. A. Hammond, 1902. Ethica: Of Morals to Nicomachus, by
E. Pargiter, 1745; with Politica, by J. Gillies, 1797, 1804, 1813;
with Rhetorica and Poetica, by T. Taylor, 1818, and later editions.
Nicomachean Ethics, 1819; mainly from text of Bekker, by D. P. Chase,
1847; revised 1861, and later editions with an introductory essay by
G. H. Lewes (Camelot Classics), 1890; re-edited by J. M. Mitchell (New
Universal Library), 1906, 1910; with an introductory essay by Prof.
J.H. Smith (Everyman's Library), 1911; by R.W.Browne (Bohn's Classical
Library), 1848, etc.; by R. Williams, 1869, 1876; by W. M. Hatch and
others (with translation of paraphrase attributed to Andronicus of
Rhodes), edited by E. Hatch, 1879; by F, H. Peters, 1881; J. E. C.
Welldon, 1892; J. Gillies (Lubbock's Hundred Books), 1893. Historia
Animalium, by R. Creswell (Bohn's Classical Library), 1848; with
Treatise on Physiognomy, by T. Taylor, 1809. Metaphysica, by T. Taylor,
1801; by J. H. M'Mahon (Bohn's Classical Library), 1848. Organon, with
Porphyry's Introduction, by O. F. Owen (Bohn's Classical Library),
1848. Posterior Analytics, E. Poste, 1850; E. S. Bourchier, 1901; On
Fallacies, E. Poste, 1866. Parva Naturalia (Greek and English), by G. R.
T. Ross, 1906; with De Anima, by W. A. Hammond, 1902. Youth and Old Age,
Life and Death and Respiration, W. Ogle, 1897. Poetica, with Notes
from the French of D'Acier, 1705; by H. J. Pye, 1788, 1792; T. Twining,
1789,1812, with Preface and Notes by H. Hamilton, 1851; Treatise on
Rhetorica and Poetica, by T. Hobbes (Bohn's Classical Library), 1850;
by Wharton, 1883 (see Greek version), S. H. Butcher, 1895, 1898, 3rd
edition, 1902; E. S. Bourchier, 1907; by Ingram Bywater, 1909. De
Partibus Animalium, W. Ogle, 1882. De Republica Athenientium, by E.
Poste, 1891; F. G. Kenyon, 1891; T. J. Dymes, 1891. De Virtutibus et
Vitiis, by W. Bridgman, 1804. Politica, from the French of Regius,
1598; by W. Ellis, 1776, 1778, 1888 (Morley's Universal Library), 1893
(Lubbock's Hundred Books); by E. Walford (with AEconomics, and Life by
Dr. Gillies) (Bohn's Classical Library), 1848; J. E. C. Welldon, 1883;
B. Jowett, 1885; with Introduction and Index by H. W. C. Davis, 1905;
Books i. iii. iv. (vii.) from Bekker's text by W. E. Bolland, with
Introduction by A. Lang, 1877. Problemata (with writings of other
philosophers), 1597, 1607, 1680, 1684, etc. Rhetorica: A summary by T.
Hobbes, 1655 (?), new edition, 1759; by the translators of the Art of
Thinking, 1686, 1816; by D. M. Crimmin, 1812; J. Gillies, 1823;
Anon. 1847; J. E. C. Welldon, 1886; R. C. Jebb, with Introduction
and Supplementary Notes by J. E. Sandys, 1909 (see under Poetica and
Ethica). Secreta Secretorum (supposititious work), Anon. 1702; from the
Hebrew version by M. Gaster, 1907, 1908. Version by Lydgate and Burgh,
edited by R. Steele (E.E.T.S.), 1894, 1898.

LIFE, ETC.: J. W. Blakesley, 1839; A Crichton (Jardine's Naturalist's
Library), 1843; J. S. Blackie, Four Phases of Morals, Socrates,
Aristotle, etc., 1871; G. Grote, Aristotle, edited by A. Bain and G.
C. Robertson, 1872, 1880; E. Wallace, Outlines of the Philosophy of
Aristotle, 1875, 1880; A. Grant (Ancient Classics for English readers),
1877; T. Davidson, Aristotle and Ancient Educational Ideals (Great
Educators), 1892.





A TREATISE ON GOVERNMENT




BOOK I




CHAPTER I


As we see that every city is a society, and every society Ed. is
established for some good purpose; for an apparent [Bekker 1252a] good
is the spring of all human actions; it is evident that this is the
principle upon which they are every one founded, and this is more
especially true of that which has for its object the best possible, and
is itself the most excellent, and comprehends all the rest. Now this is
called a city, and the society thereof a political society; for those
who think that the principles of a political, a regal, a family, and
a herile government are the same are mistaken, while they suppose that
each of these differ in the numbers to whom their power extends, but
not in their constitution: so that with them a herile government is one
composed of a very few, a domestic of more, a civil and a regal of still
more, as if there was no difference between a large family and a small
city, or that a regal government and a political one are the same, only
that in the one a single person is continually at the head of public
affairs; in the other, that each member of the state has in his turn a
share in the government, and is at one time a magistrate, at another
a private person, according to the rules of political science. But now
this is not true, as will be evident to any one who will consider this
question in the most approved method. As, in an inquiry into every other
subject, it is necessary to separate the different parts of which it is
compounded, till we arrive at their first elements, which are the most
minute parts thereof; so by the same proceeding we shall acquire a
knowledge of the primary parts of a city and see wherein they differ
from each other, and whether the rules of art will give us any
assistance in examining into each of these things which are mentioned.





CHAPTER II


Now if in this particular science any one would attend to its original
seeds, and their first shoot, he would then as in others have the
subject perfectly before him; and perceive, in the first place, that it
is requisite that those should be joined together whose species cannot
exist without each other, as the male and the female, for the business
of propagation; and this not through choice, but by that natural impulse
which acts both upon plants and animals also, for the purpose of their
leaving behind them others like themselves. It is also from natural
causes that some beings command and others obey, that each may obtain
their mutual safety; for a being who is endowed with a mind capable
of reflection and forethought is by nature the superior and governor,
whereas he whose excellence is merely corporeal is formect to be a
slave; whence it follows that the different state of master [1252b] and
slave is equally advantageous to both. But there is a natural difference
between a female and a slave: for nature is not like the artists
who make the Delphic swords for the use of the poor, but for every
particular purpose she has her separate instruments, and thus her ends
are most complete, for whatsoever is employed on one subject only,
brings that one to much greater perfection than when employed on many;
and yet among the barbarians, a female and a slave are upon a level in
the community, the reason for which is, that amongst them there are none
qualified by nature to govern, therefore their society can be nothing
but between slaves of different sexes. For which reason the poets say,
it is proper for the Greeks to govern the barbarians, as if a barbarian
and a slave were by nature one. Now of these two societies the domestic
is the first, and Hesiod is right when he says, "First a house, then
a wife, then an ox for the plough," for the poor man has always an ox
before a household slave. That society then which nature has established
for daily support is the domestic, and those who compose it are called
by Charondas _homosipuoi_, and by Epimenides the Cretan _homokapnoi_;
but the society of many families, which was first instituted for their
lasting, mutual advantage, is called a village, and a village is most
naturally composed of the descendants of one family, whom some persons
call homogalaktes, the children and the children's children thereof: for
which reason cities were originally governed by kings, as the barbarian
states now are, which are composed of those who had before submitted to
kingly government; for every family is governed by the elder, as are the
branches thereof, on account of their relationship thereunto, which
is what Homer says, "Each one ruled his wife and child;" and in this
scattered manner they formerly lived. And the opinion which universally
prevails, that the gods themselves are subject to kingly government,
arises from hence, that all men formerly were, and many are so now; and
as they imagined themselves to be made in the likeness of the gods, so
they supposed their manner of life must needs be the same. And when many
villages so entirely join themselves together as in every respect to
form but one society, that society is a city, and contains in itself, if
I may so speak, the end and perfection of government: first founded that
we might live, but continued that we may live happily. For which reason
every city must be allowed to be the work of nature, if we admit that
the original society between male and female is; for to this as their
end all subordinate societies tend, and the end of everything is the
nature of it. For what every being is in its most perfect state, that
certainly is the nature of that being, whether it be a man, a horse, or
a house: besides, whatsoever produces the final cause and the end which
we [1253a] desire, must be best; but a government complete in itself is
that final cause and what is best. Hence it is evident that a city is
a natural production, and that man is naturally a political animal, and
that whosoever is naturally and not accidentally unfit for society, must
be either inferior or superior to man: thus the man in Homer, who is
reviled for being "without society, without law, without family." Such
a one must naturally be of a quarrelsome disposition, and as solitary as
the birds. The gift of speech also evidently proves that man is a more
social animal than the bees, or any of the herding cattle: for nature,
as we say, does nothing in vain, and man is the only animal who enjoys
it. Voice indeed, as being the token of pleasure and pain, is imparted
to others also, and thus much their nature is capable of, to perceive
pleasure and pain, and to impart these sensations to others; but it is
by speech that we are enabled to express what is useful for us, and what
is hurtful, and of course what is just and what is unjust: for in
this particular man differs from other animals, that he alone has
a perception of good and evil, of just and unjust, and it is a
participation of these common sentiments which forms a family and a
city. Besides, the notion of a city naturally precedes that of a family
or an individual, for the whole must necessarily be prior to the parts,
for if you take away the whole man, you cannot say a foot or a hand
remains, unless by equivocation, as supposing a hand of stone to be
made, but that would only be a dead one; but everything is understood to
be this or that by its energic qualities and powers, so that when these
no longer remain, neither can that be said to be the same, but something
of the same name. That a city then precedes an individual is plain,
for if an individual is not in himself sufficient to compose a perfect
government, he is to a city as other parts are to a whole; but he that
is incapable of society, or so complete in himself as not to want it,
makes no part of a city, as a beast or a god. There is then in all
persons a natural impetus to associate with each other in this manner,
and he who first founded civil society was the cause of the greatest
good; for as by the completion of it man is the most excellent of all
living beings, so without law and justice he would be the worst of all,
for nothing is so difficult to subdue as injustice in arms: but these
arms man is born with, namely, prudence and valour, which he may apply
to the most opposite purposes, for he who abuses them will be the most
wicked, the most cruel, the most lustful, and most gluttonous being
imaginable; for justice is a political virtue, by the rules of it the
state is regulated, and these rules are the criterion of what is right.





CHAPTER III


SINCE it is now evident of what parts a city is composed, it will be
necessary to treat first of family government, for every city is made
up of families, and every family [1253b] has again its separate parts of
which it is composed. When a family is complete, it consists of freemen
and slaves; but as in every subject we should begin with examining into
the smallest parts of which it consists, and as the first and smallest
parts of a family are the master and slave, the husband and wife, the
father and child, let us first inquire into these three, what each of
them may be, and what they ought to be; that is to say, the herile, the
nuptial, and the paternal. Let these then be considered as the three
distinct parts of a family: some think that the providing what is
necessary for the family is something different from the government of
it, others that this is the greatest part of it; it shall be considered
separately; but we will first speak of a master and a slave, that we
may both understand the nature of those things which are absolutely
necessary, and also try if we can learn anything better on this subject
than what is already known. Some persons have thought that the power of
the master over his slave originates from his superior knowledge, and
that this knowledge is the same in the master, the magistrate, and the
king, as we have already said; but others think that herile government
is contrary to nature, and that it is the law which makes one man a
slave and another free, but that in nature there is no difference; for
which reason that power cannot be founded in justice, but in force.




CHAPTER IV


Since then a subsistence is necessary in every family, the means of
procuring it certainly makes up part of the management of a family, for
without necessaries it is impossible to live, and to live well. As
in all arts which are brought to perfection it is necessary that they
should have their proper instruments if they would complete their works,
so is it in the art of managing a family: now of instruments some of
them are alive, others inanimate; thus with respect to the pilot of the
ship, the tiller is without life, the sailor is alive; for a servant
is as an instrument in many arts. Thus property is as an instrument
to living; an estate is a multitude of instruments; so a slave is an
animated instrument, but every one that can minister of himself is more
valuable than any other instrument; for if every instrument, at command,
or from a preconception of its master's will, could accomplish its work
(as the story goes of the statues of Daedalus; or what the poet tells us
of the tripods of Vulcan, "that they moved of their own accord into the
assembly of the gods "), the shuttle would then weave, and the lyre play
of itself; nor would the architect want servants, or the [1254a] master
slaves. Now what are generally called instruments are the efficients
of something else, but possessions are what we simply use: thus with a
shuttle we make something else for our use; but we only use a coat, or a
bed: since then making and using differ from each other in species, and
they both require their instruments, it is necessary that these should
be different from each other. Now life is itself what we use, and not
what we employ as the efficient of something else; for which reason the
services of a slave are for use. A possession may be considered in the
same nature as a part of anything; now a part is not only a part of
something, but also is nothing else; so is a possession; therefore a
master is only the master of the slave, but no part of him; but the
slave is not only the slave of the master, but nothing else but that.
This fully explains what is the nature of a slave, and what are his
capacities; for that being who by nature is nothing of himself, but
totally another's, and is a man, is a slave by nature; and that man who
is the property of another, is his mere chattel, though he continues a
man; but a chattel is an instrument for use, separate from the body.




CHAPTER V


But whether any person is such by nature, and whether it is advantageous
and just for any one to be a slave or no, or whether all slavery is
contrary to nature, shall be considered hereafter; not that it is
difficult to determine it upon general principles, or to understand
it from matters of fact; for that some should govern, and others be
governed, is not only necessary but useful, and from the hour of their
birth some are marked out for those purposes, and others for the other,
and there are many species of both sorts. And the better those are who
are governed the better also is the government, as for instance of man,
rather than the brute creation: for the more excellent the materials
are with which the work is finished, the more excellent certainly is the
work; and wherever there is a governor and a governed, there certainly
is some work produced; for whatsoever is composed of many parts, which
jointly become one, whether conjunct or separate, evidently show the
marks of governing and governed; and this is true of every living thing
in all nature; nay, even in some things which partake not of life, as
in music; but this probably would be a disquisition too foreign to our
present purpose. Every living thing in the first place is composed of
soul and body, of these the one is by nature the governor, the other the
governed; now if we would know what is natural, we ought to search for
it in those subjects in which nature appears most perfect, and not in
those which are corrupted; we should therefore examine into a man who
is most perfectly formed both in soul and body, in whom this is evident,
for in the depraved and vicious the body seems [1254b] to rule rather
than the soul, on account of their being corrupt and contrary to nature.
We may then, as we affirm, perceive in an animal the first principles
of herile and political government; for the soul governs the body as the
master governs his slave; the mind governs the appetite with a political
or a kingly power, which shows that it is both natural and advantageous
that the body should be governed by the soul, and the pathetic part by
the mind, and that part which is possessed of reason; but to have no
ruling power, or an improper one, is hurtful to all; and this holds
true not only of man, but of other animals also, for tame animals are
naturally better than wild ones, and it is advantageous that both should
be under subjection to man; for this is productive of their common
safety: so is it naturally with the male and the female; the one is
superior, the other inferior; the one governs, the other is governed;
and the same rule must necessarily hold good with respect to all
mankind. Those men therefore who are as much inferior to others as the
body is to the soul, are to be thus disposed of, as the proper use of
them is their bodies, in which their excellence consists; and if what I
have said be true, they are slaves by nature, and it is advantageous to
them to be always under government. He then is by nature formed a slave
who is qualified to become the chattel of another person, and on that
account is so, and who has just reason enough to know that there is such
a faculty, without being indued with the use of it; for other animals
have no perception of reason, but are entirely guided by appetite,
and indeed they vary very little in their use from each other; for the
advantage which we receive, both from slaves and tame animals, arises
from their bodily strength administering to our necessities; for it
is the intention of nature to make the bodies of slaves and freemen
different from each other, that the one should be robust for their
necessary purposes, the others erect, useless indeed for what slaves are
employed in, but fit for civil life, which is divided into the duties of
war and peace; though these rules do not always take place, for slaves
have sometimes the bodies of freemen, sometimes the souls; if then it
is evident that if some bodies are as much more excellent than others as
the statues of the gods excel the human form, every one will allow that
the inferior ought to be slaves to the superior; and if this is true
with respect to the body, it is still juster to determine in the same
manner, when we consider the soul; though it is not so easy to perceive
the beauty of [1255a] the soul as it is of the body. Since then some
men are slaves by nature, and others are freemen, it is clear that where
slavery is advantageous to any one, then it is just to make him a slave.




CHAPTER VI


But it is not difficult to perceive that those who maintain the contrary
opinion have some reason on their side; for a man may become a slave two
different ways; for he may be so by law also, and this law is a certain
compact, by which whatsoever is taken in battle is adjudged to be the
property of the conquerors: but many persons who are conversant in law
call in question this pretended right, and say that it would be hard
that a man should be compelled by violence to be the slave and subject
of another who had the power to compel him, and was his superior in
strength; and upon this subject, even of those who are wise, some think
one way and some another; but the cause of this doubt and variety of
opinions arises from hence, that great abilities, when accompanied with
proper means, are generally able to succeed by force: for victory is
always owing to a superiority in some advantageous circumstances; so
that it seems that force never prevails but in consequence of great
abilities. But still the dispute concerning the justice of it remains;
for some persons think, that justice consists in benevolence, others
think it just that the powerful should govern: in the midst of these
contrary opinions, there are no reasons sufficient to convince us, that
the right of being master and governor ought not to be placed with those
who have the greatest abilities. Some persons, entirely resting upon the
right which the law gives (for that which is legal is in some respects
just), insist upon it that slavery occasioned by war is just, not that
they say it is wholly so, for it may happen that the principle upon
which the wars were commenced is unjust; moreover no one will say that a
man who is unworthily in slavery is therefore a slave; for if so, men of
the noblest families might happen to be slaves, and the descendants of
slaves, if they should chance to be taken prisoners in war and sold: to
avoid this difficulty they say that such persons should not be called
slaves, but barbarians only should; but when they say this, they do
nothing more than inquire who is a slave by nature, which was what we
at first said; for we must acknowledge that there are some persons
who, wherever they are, must necessarily be slaves, but others in no
situation; thus also it is with those of noble descent: it is not only
in their own country that they are Esteemed as such, but everywhere,
but the barbarians are respected on this account at home only; as if
nobility and freedom were of two sorts, the one universal, the other not
so. Thus says the Helen of Theodectes:

  "Who dares reproach me with the name of slave? When from the
immortal gods, on either side, I draw my lineage."

Those who express sentiments like these, shew only that they distinguish
the slave and the freeman, the noble and the ignoble from each other
by their virtues and their [1255b] vices; for they think it reasonable,
that as a man begets a man, and a beast a beast, so from a good man, a
good man should be descended; and this is what nature desires to do, but
frequently cannot accomplish it. It is evident then that this doubt
has some reason in it, and that these persons are not slaves, and those
freemen, by the appointment of nature; and also that in some instances
it is sufficiently clear, that it is advantageous to both parties for
this man to be a slave, and that to be a master, and that it is right
and just, that some should be governed, and others govern, in the manner
that nature intended; of which sort of government is that which a master
exercises over a slave. But to govern ill is disadvantageous to both;
for the same thing is useful to the part and to the whole, to the body
and to the soul; but the slave is as it were a part of the master, as if
he were an animated part of his body, though separate. For which reason
a mutual utility and friendship may subsist between the master and the
slave, I mean when they are placed by nature in that relation to each
other, for the contrary takes place amongst those who are reduced to
slavery by the law, or by conquest.




CHAPTER VII


It is evident from what has been said, that a herile and a political
government are not the same, or that all governments are alike to each
other, as some affirm; for one is adapted to the nature of freemen, the
other to that of slaves. Domestic government is a monarchy, for that is
what prevails in every house; but a political state is the government of
free men and equals. The master is not so called from his knowing how to
manage his slave, but because he is so; for the same reason a slave and
a freeman have their respective appellations. There is also one sort of
knowledge proper for a master, another for a slave; the slave's is of
the nature of that which was taught by a slave at Syracuse; for he for
a stipulated sum instructed the boys in all the business of a household
slave, of which there are various sorts to be learnt, as the art of
cookery, and other such-like services, of which some are allotted to
some, and others to others; some employments being more honourable,
others more necessary; according to the proverb, "One slave excels
another, one master excels another:" in such-like things the knowledge
of a slave consists. The knowledge of the master is to be able properly
to employ his slaves, for the mastership of slaves is the employment,
not the mere possession of them; not that this knowledge contains
anything great or respectable; for what a slave ought to know how to do,
that a master ought to know how to order; for which reason, those who
have it in their power to be free from these low attentions, employ a
steward for this business, and apply themselves either to public affairs
or philosophy: the knowledge of procuring what is necessary for a family
is different from that which belongs either to the master or the slave:
and to do this justly must be either by war or hunting. And thus much of
the difference between a master and a slave.




CHAPTER VIII


[1256a] As a slave is a particular species of property, let us by
all means inquire into the nature of property in general, and the
acquisition of money, according to the manner we have proposed. In the
first place then, some one may doubt whether the getting of money is
the same thing as economy, or whether it is a part of it, or something
subservient to it; and if so, whether it is as the art of making
shuttles is to the art of weaving, or the art of making brass to that
of statue founding, for they are not of the same service; for the one
supplies the tools, the other the matter: by the matter I mean the
subject out of which the work is finished, as wool for the cloth and
brass for the statue. It is evident then that the getting of money is
not the same thing as economy, for the business of the one is to furnish
the means of the other to use them; and what art is there employed in
the management of a family but economy, but whether this is a part of
it, or something of a different species, is a doubt; for if it is
the business of him who is to get money to find out how riches and
possessions may be procured, and both these arise from various
causes, we must first inquire whether the art of husbandry is part of
money-getting or something different, and in general, whether the same
is not true of every acquisition and every attention which relates to
provision. But as there are many sorts of provision, so are the methods
of living both of man and the brute creation very various; and as it is
impossible to live without food, the difference in that particular makes
the lives of animals so different from each other. Of beasts, some
live in herds, others separate, as is most convenient for procuring
themselves food; as some of them live upon flesh, others on fruit, and
others on whatsoever they light on, nature having so distinguished
their course of life, that they can very easily procure themselves
subsistence; and as the same things are not agreeable to all, but one
animal likes one thing and another another, it follows that the lives
of those beasts who live upon flesh must be different from the lives of
those who live on fruits; so is it with men, their lives differ greatly
from each other; and of all these the shepherd's is the idlest, for they
live upon the flesh of tame animals, without any trouble, while they are
obliged to change their habitations on account of their flocks, which
they are compelled to follow, cultivating, as it were, a living farm.
Others live exercising violence over living creatures, one pursuing this
thing, another that, these preying upon men; those who live near lakes
and marshes and rivers, or the sea itself, on fishing, while others are
fowlers, or hunters of wild beasts; but the greater part of mankind live
upon the produce of the earth and its cultivated fruits; and the manner
in which all those live who follow the direction of nature, and labour
for their own subsistence, is nearly the same, without ever thinking
to procure any provision by way of exchange or merchandise, such are
shepherds, husband-men, [1256b] robbers, fishermen, and hunters: some
join different employments together, and thus live very agreeably;
supplying those deficiencies which were wanting to make their
subsistence depend upon themselves only: thus, for instance, the same
person shall be a shepherd and a robber, or a husbandman and a hunter;
and so with respect to the rest, they pursue that mode of life which
necessity points out. This provision then nature herself seems to have
furnished all animals with, as well immediately upon their first origin
as also when they are arrived at a state of maturity; for at the first
of these periods some of them are provided in the womb with proper
nourishment, which continues till that which is born can get food for
itself, as is the case with worms and birds; and as to those which bring
forth their young alive, they have the means for their subsistence for a
certain time within themselves, namely milk. It is evident then that we
may conclude of those things that are, that plants are created for the
sake of animals, and animals for the sake of men; the tame for our use
and provision; the wild, at least the greater part, for our provision
also, or for some other advantageous purpose, as furnishing us with
clothes, and the like. As nature therefore makes nothing either
imperfect or in vain, it necessarily follows that she has made all these
things for men: for which reason what we gain in war is in a certain
degree a natural acquisition; for hunting is a part of it, which it is
necessary for us to employ against wild beasts; and those men who being
intended by nature for slavery are unwilling to submit to it, on which
occasion such a. war is by nature just: that species of acquisition then
only which is according to nature is part of economy; and this ought to
be at hand, or if not, immediately procured, namely, what is necessary
to be kept in store to live upon, and which are useful as well for the
state as the family. And true riches seem to consist in these; and the
acquisition of those possessions which are necessary for a happy life is
not infinite; though Solon says otherwise in this verse:

  "No bounds to riches can be fixed for man;"

for they may be fixed as in other arts; for the instruments of no art
whatsoever are infinite, either in their number or their magnitude; but
riches are a number of instruments in domestic and civil economy; it is
therefore evident that the acquisition of certain things according
to nature is a part both of domestic and civil economy, and for what
reason.




CHAPTER IX


There is also another species of acquisition which they [1257a]
particularly call pecuniary, and with great propriety; and by this
indeed it seems that there are no bounds to riches and wealth. Now many
persons suppose, from their near relation to each other, that this is
one and the same with that we have just mentioned, but it is not the
same as that, though not very different; one of these is natural, the
other is not, but rather owing to some art and skill; we will enter into
a particular examination of this subject. The uses of every possession
are two, both dependent upon the thing itself, but not in the same
manner, the one supposing an inseparable connection with it, the other
not; as a shoe, for instance, which may be either worn, or exchanged
for something else, both these are the uses of the shoe; for he who
exchanges a shoe with some man who wants one, for money or provisions,
uses the shoe as a shoe, but not according to the original intention,
for shoes were not at first made to be exchanged. The same thing holds
true of all other possessions; for barter, in general, had its original
beginning in nature, some men having a surplus, others too little of
what was necessary for them: hence it is evident, that the selling
provisions for money is not according to the natural use of things; for
they were obliged to use barter for those things which they wanted; but
it is plain that barter could have no place in the first, that is to
say, in family society; but must have begun when the number of those
who composed the community was enlarged: for the first of these had all
things in common; but when they came to be separated they were obliged
to exchange with each other many different things which both parties
wanted. Which custom of barter is still preserved amongst many barbarous
nations, who procure one necessary with another, but never sell
anything; as giving and receiving wine for corn and the like. This
sort of barter is not contradictory to nature, nor is it any species of
money-getting; but is necessary in procuring that subsistence which is
so consonant thereunto. But this barter introduced the use of money, as
might be expected; for a convenient place from whence to import what you
wanted, or to export what you had a surplus of, being often at a great
distance, money necessarily made its way into commerce; for it is not
everything which is naturally most useful that is easiest of carriage;
for which reason they invented something to exchange with each other
which they should mutually give and take, that being really valuable
itself, should have the additional advantage of being of easy
conveyance, for the purposes of life, as iron and silver, or anything
else of the same nature: and this at first passed in value simply
according to its weight or size; but in process of time it had a certain
stamp, to save the trouble of weighing, which stamp expressed its value.
[1257b]

Money then being established as the necessary medium of exchange,
another species of money-getting soon took place, namely, by buying
and selling, at probably first in a simple manner, afterwards with more
skill and experience, where and how the greatest profits might be made.
For which reason the art of money-getting seems to be chiefly conversant
about trade, and the business of it to be able to tell where the
greatest profits can be made, being the means of procuring abundance
of wealth and possessions: and thus wealth is very often supposed to
consist in the quantity of money which any one possesses, as this is the
medium by which all trade is conducted and a fortune made, others again
regard it as of no value, as being of none by nature, but arbitrarily
made so by compact; so that if those who use it should alter their
sentiments, it would be worth nothing, as being of no service for
any necessary purpose. Besides, he who abounds in money often wants
necessary food; and it is impossible to say that any person is in good
circumstances when with all his possessions he may perish with hunger.

Like Midas in the fable, who from his insatiable wish had everything he
touched turned into gold. For which reason others endeavour to procure
other riches and other property, and rightly, for there are other riches
and property in nature; and these are the proper objects of economy:
while trade only procures money, not by all means, but by the exchange
of it, and for that purpose it is this which it is chiefly employed
about, for money is the first principle and the end of trade; nor are
there any bounds to be set to what is thereby acquired. Thus also there
are no limits to the art of medicine, with respect to the health which
it attempts to procure; the same also is true of all other arts; no line
can be drawn to terminate their bounds, the several professors of them
being desirous to extend them as far as possible. (But still the means
to be employed for that purpose are limited; and these are the limits
beyond which the art cannot proceed.) Thus in the art of acquiring
riches there are no limits, for the object of that is money and
possessions; but economy has a boundary, though this has not: for
acquiring riches is not the business of that, for which reason it should
seem that some boundary should be set to riches, though we see the
contrary to this is what is practised; for all those who get riches add
to their money without end; the cause of which is the near connection
of these two arts with each other, which sometimes occasions the one to
change employments with the other, as getting of money is their common
object: for economy requires the possession of wealth, but not on
its own account but with another view, to purchase things necessary
therewith; but the other procures it merely to increase it: so that some
persons are confirmed in their belief, that this is the proper object
of economy, and think that for this purpose money should be saved and
hoarded up without end; the reason for which disposition is, that they
are intent upon living, but not upon living well; and this desire being
boundless in its extent, the means which they aim at for that purpose
are boundless also; and those who propose to live well, often confine
that to the enjoyment of the pleasures of sense; so that as this also
seems to depend upon what a man has, all their care is to get money,
and hence arises the other cause for this art; for as this enjoyment is
excessive in its degree, they endeavour to procure means proportionate
to supply it; and if they cannot do this merely by the art of dealing in
money, they will endeavour to do it by other ways, and apply all their
powers to a purpose they were not by nature intended for. Thus, for
instance, courage was intended to inspire fortitude, not to get money
by; neither is this the end of the soldier's or the physician's art,
but victory and health. But such persons make everything subservient to
money-getting, as if this was the only end; and to the end everything
ought to refer.

We have now considered that art of money-getting which is not necessary,
and have seen in what manner we became in want of it; and also that
which is necessary, which is different from it; for that economy which
is natural, and whose object is to provide food, is not like this
unlimited in its extent, but has its bounds.




CHAPTER X


We have now determined what was before doubtful, whether or no the art
of getting money is his business who is at the head of a family or a
state, and though not strictly so, it is however very necessary; for
as a politician does not make men, but receiving them from the hand of
nature employs them to proper purposes; thus the earth, or the sea, or
something else ought to supply them with provisions, and this it is the
business of the master of the family to manage properly; for it is not
the weaver's business to make yarn, but to use it, and to distinguish
what is good and useful from what is bad and of no service; and indeed
some one may inquire why getting money should be a part of economy when
the art of healing is not, as it is as requisite that the family should
be in health as that they should eat, or have anything else which is
necessary; and as it is indeed in some particulars the business both of
the master of the family, and he to whom the government of the state
is entrusted, to see after the health of those under their care, but in
others not, but the physician's; so also as to money; in some respects
it is the business of the master of the family, in others not, but of
the servant; but as we have already said, it is chiefly nature's, for
it is her part to supply her offspring with food; for everything finds
nourishment left for it in what produced it; for which reason
the natural riches of all men arise from fruits and animals. Now
money-making, as we say, being twofold, it may be applied to two
purposes, the service of the house or retail trade; of which the first
is necessary and commendable, the other justly censurable; for it has
not its origin in [1258b] nature, but by it men gain from each other;
for usury is most reasonably detested, as it is increasing our fortune
by money itself, and not employing it for the purpose it was originally
intended, namely exchange.

And this is the explanation of the name (TOKOS), which means the
breeding of money. For as offspring resemble their parents, so usury
is money bred of money. Whence of all forms of money-making it is most
against nature.




CHAPTER XI


Having already sufficiently considered the general principles of this
subject, let us now go into the practical part thereof; the one is a
liberal employment for the mind, the other necessary. These things are
useful in the management of one's affairs; to be skilful in the nature
of cattle, which are most profitable, and where, and how; as for
instance, what advantage will arise from keeping horses, or oxen, or
sheep, or any other live stock; it is also necessary to be acquainted
with the comparative value of these things, and which of them in
particular places are worth most; for some do better in one place, some
in another. Agriculture also should be understood, and the management
of arable grounds and orchards; and also the care of bees, and fish, and
birds, from whence any profit may arise; these are the first and most
proper parts of domestic management.

With respect to gaining money by exchange, the principal method of doing
this is by merchandise, which is carried on in three different ways,
either by sending the commodity for sale by sea or by land, or else
selling it on the place where it grows; and these differ from each other
in this, that the one is more profitable, the other safer. The second
method is by usury. The third by receiving wages for work done, and
this either by being employed in some mean art, or else in mere bodily
labour. There is also a third species of improving a fortune, that is
something between this and the first; for it partly depends upon
nature, partly upon exchange; the subject of which is, things that are
immediately from the earth, or their produce, which, though they bear
no fruit, are yet useful, such as selling of timber and the whole art of
metallurgy, which includes many different species, for there are various
sorts of things dug out of the earth.

These we have now mentioned in general, but to enter into particulars
concerning each of them, though it might be useful to the artist, would
be tiresome to dwell on. Now of all the works of art, those are the most
excellent wherein chance has the least to do, and those are the meanest
which deprave the body, those the most servile in which bodily strength
alone is chiefly wanted, those most illiberal which require least skill;
but as there are books written on these subjects by some persons, as
by Chares the Panian, and Apollodorus the Lemnian, upon husbandry and
planting; and by others on other matters, [1259b] let those who have
occasion consult them thereon; besides, every person should collect
together whatsoever he hears occasionally mentioned, by means of which
many of those who aimed at making a fortune have succeeded in their
intentions; for all these are useful to those who make a point of
getting money, as in the contrivance of Thales the Milesian (which was
certainly a gainful one, but as it was his it was attributed to
his wisdom, though the method he used was a general one, and would
universally succeed), when they reviled him for his poverty, as if the
study of philosophy was useless: for they say that he, perceiving by his
skill in astrology that there would be great plenty of olives that year,
while it was yet winter, having got a little money, he gave earnest for
all the oil works that were in Miletus and Chios, which he hired at a
low price, there being no one to bid against him; but when the season
came for making oil, many persons wanting them, he all at once let them
upon what terms he pleased; and raising a large sum of money by that
means, convinced them that it was easy for philosophers to be rich if
they chose it, but that that was not what they aimed at; in this manner
is Thales said to have shown his wisdom. It indeed is, as we have
said, generally gainful for a person to contrive to make a monopoly of
anything; for which reason some cities also take this method when they
want money, and monopolise their commodities. There was a certain person
in Sicily who laid out a sum of money which was deposited in his hand in
buying up all the iron from the iron merchants; so that when the dealers
came from the markets to purchase, there was no one had any to sell but
himself; and though he put no great advance upon it, yet by laying out
fifty talents he made an hundred. When Dionysius heard this he permitted
him to take his money with him, but forbid him to continue any longer in
Sicily, as being one who contrived means for getting money inconsistent
with his affairs. This man's view and Thales's was exactly the same;
both of them contrived to procure a monopoly for themselves: it is
useful also for politicians to understand these things, for many states
want to raise money and by such means, as well as private families,
nay more so; for which reason some persons who are employed in the
management of public affairs confine themselves to this province only.




CHAPTER XII


There are then three parts of domestic government, the masters, of
which we have already treated, the fathers, and the husbands; now the
government of the wife and children should both be that of free persons,
but not the [I259b] same; for the wife should be treated as a citizen of
a free state, the children should be under kingly power; for the male is
by nature superior to the female, except when something happens contrary
to the usual course of nature, as is the elder and perfect to the
younger and imperfect. Now in the generality of free states, the
governors and the governed alternately change place; for an equality
without any preference is what nature chooses; however, when one
governs and another is governed, she endeavours that there should be a
distinction between them in forms, expressions, and honours; according
to what Amasis said of his laver. This then should be the established
rule between the man and the woman. The government of children should
be kingly; for the power of the father over the child is founded in
affection and seniority, which is a species of kingly government; for
which reason Homer very properly calls Jupiter "the father of gods and
men," who was king of both these; for nature requires that a king should
be of the same species with those whom he governs, though superior in
some particulars, as is the case between the elder and the younger, the
father and the son.




CHAPTER XIII


It is evident then that in the due government of a family, greater
attention should be paid to the several members of it and their virtues
than to the possessions or riches of it; and greater to the freemen
than the slaves: but here some one may doubt whether there is any other
virtue in a slave than his organic services, and of higher estimation
than these, as temperance, fortitude, justice, and such-like habits, or
whether they possess only bodily qualities: each side of the question
has its difficulties; for if they possess these virtues, wherein do
they differ from freemen? and that they do not, since they are men,
and partakers of reason, is absurd. Nearly the same inquiry may be made
concerning a woman and a child, whether these also have their proper
virtues; whether a woman ought to be temperate, brave, and just, and
whether a child is temperate or no; and indeed this inquiry ought to be
general, whether the virtues of those who, by nature, either govern or
are governed, are the same or different; for if it is necessary that
both of them should partake of the fair and good, why is it also
necessary that, without exception, the one should govern, the other
always be governed? for this cannot arise from their possessing these
qualities in different degrees; for to govern, and to be governed, are
things different in species, but more or less are not. And yet it is
wonderful that one party ought to have them, and the other not; for if
he who is to govern should not be temperate and just, how can he govern
well? or if he is to be governed, how can he be governed well? for he
who is intemperate [1260a] and a coward will never do what he ought: it
is evident then that both parties ought to be virtuous; but there is a
difference between them, as there is between those who by nature command
and who by nature obey, and this originates in the soul; for in this
nature has planted the governing and submitting principle, the virtues
of which we say are different, as are those of a rational and an
irrational being. It is plain then that the same principle may be
extended farther, and that there are in nature a variety of things which
govern and are governed; for a freeman is governed in a different manner
from a slave, a male from a female, and a man from a child: and all
these have parts of mind within them, but in a different manner. Thus
a slave can have no power of determination, a woman but a weak one, a
child an imperfect one. Thus also must it necessarily be with respect to
moral virtues; all must be supposed to possess them, but not in the
same manner, but as is best suited to every one's employment; on which
account he who is to govern ought to be perfect in moral virtue, for his
business is entirely that of an architect, and reason is the architect;
while others want only that portion of it which may be sufficient for
their station; from whence it is evident, that although moral virtue is
common to all those we have spoken of, yet the temperance of a man and
a woman are not the same, nor their courage, nor their justice, though
Socrates thought otherwise; for the courage of the man consists in
commanding, the woman's in obeying; and the same is true in other
particulars: and this will be evident to those who will examine
different virtues separately; for those who use general terms deceive
themselves when they say, that virtue consists in a good disposition of
mind, or doing what is right, or something of this sort. They do much
better who enumerate the different virtues as Georgias did, than those
who thus define them; and as Sophocles speaks of a woman, we think
of all persons, that their 'virtues should be applicable to their
characters, for says he,

  "Silence is a woman's ornament,"

but it is not a man's; and as a child is incomplete, it is evident that
his virtue is not to be referred to himself in his present situation,
but to that in which he will be complete, and his preceptor. In like
manner the virtue of a slave is to be referred to his master; for we
laid it down as a maxim, that the use of a slave was to employ him in
what you wanted; so that it is clear enough that few virtues are wanted
in his station, only that he may not neglect his work through idleness
or fear: some person may question if what I have said is true, whether
virtue is not necessary for artificers in their calling, for they often
through idleness neglect their work, but the difference between them
is very great; for a slave is connected with you for life, but the
artificer not so nearly: as near therefore as the artificer approaches
to the situation of a slave, just so much ought he to have of the
virtues of one; for a mean artificer is to a certain point a slave; but
then a slave is one of those things which are by nature what they are,
but this is not true [1260b] of a shoemaker, or any other artist. It is
evident then that a slave ought to be trained to those virtues which are
proper for his situation by his master; and not by him who has the power
of a master, to teach him any particular art. Those therefore are in the
wrong who would deprive slaves of reason, and say that they have only to
follow their orders; for slaves want more instruction than children, and
thus we determine this matter. It is necessary, I am sensible, for every
one who treats upon government, to enter particularly into the relations
of husband and wife, and of parent and child, and to show what are the
virtues of each and their respective connections with each other; what
is right and what is wrong; and how the one ought to be followed, and
the other avoided. Since then every family is part of a city, and each
of those individuals is part of a family, and the virtue of the parts
ought to correspond to the virtue of the whole; it is necessary, that
both the wives and children of the community should be instructed
correspondent to the nature thereof, if it is of consequence to the
virtue of the state, that the wives and children therein should be
virtuous, and of consequence it certainly is, for the wives are one half
of the free persons; and of the children the succeeding citizens are to
be formed. As then we have determined these points, we will leave
the rest to be spoken to in another place, as if the subject was now
finished; and beginning again anew, first consider the sentiments of
those who have treated of the most perfect forms of government.




BOOK II




CHAPTER I


Since then we propose to inquire what civil society is of all others
best for those who have it in their power to live entirely as they wish,
it is necessary to examine into the polity of those states which are
allowed to be well governed; and if there should be any others which
some persons have described, and which appear properly regulated, to
note what is right and useful in them; and when we point out wherein
they have failed, let not this be imputed to an affectation of wisdom,
for it is because there are great defects in all those which are already
established, that I have been induced to undertake this work. We will
begin with that part of the subject which naturally presents itself
first to our consideration. The members of every state must of necessity
have all things in common, or some things common, and not others,
or nothing at all common. To have nothing in common is evidently
impossible, for society itself is one species of [1261a] community; and
the first thing necessary thereunto is a common place of habitation,
namely the city, which must be one, and this every citizen must have a
share in. But in a government which is to be well founded, will it be
best to admit of a community in everything which is capable thereof, or
only in some particulars, but in others not? for it is possible that the
citizens may have their wives, and children, and goods in common, as
in Plato's Commonwealth; for in that Socrates affirms that all these
particulars ought to be so. Which then shall we prefer? the custom which
is already established, or the laws which are proposed in that treatise?




CHAPTER II


Now as a community of wives is attended with many other difficulties, so
neither does the cause for which he would frame his government in this
manner seem agreeable to reason, nor is it capable of producing that end
which he has proposed, and for which he says it ought to take place; nor
has he given any particular directions for putting it in practice. Now
I also am willing to agree with Socrates in the principle which he
proceeds upon, and admit that the city ought to be one as much as
possible; and yet it is evident that if it is contracted too much, it
will be no longer a city, for that necessarily supposes a multitude; so
that if we proceed in this manner, we shall reduce a city to a family,
and a family to a single person: for we admit that a family is one in a
greater degree than a city, and a single person than a family; so that
if this end could be obtained, it should never be put in practice, as it
would annihilate the city; for a city does not only consist of a large
number of inhabitants, but there must also be different sorts; for were
they all alike, there could be no city; for a confederacy and a city are
two different things; for a confederacy is valuable from its numbers,
although all those who compose it are men of the same calling; for this
is entered into for the sake of mutual defence, as we add an additional
weight to make the scale go down. The same distinction prevails between
a city and a nation when the people are not collected into separate
villages, but live as the Arcadians. Now those things in which a city
should be one are of different sorts, and in preserving an alternate
reciprocation of power between these, the safety thereof consists (as
I have already mentioned in my treatise on Morals), for amongst freemen
and equals this is absolutely necessary; for all cannot govern at the
same time, but either by the year, or according to some other regulation
or time, by which means every one in his turn will be in office; as
if the shoemakers and carpenters should exchange occupations, and not
always be employed in the same calling. But as it is evidently better,
that these should continue to exercise their respective trades; so also
in civil society, where it is possible, it would be better that the
government should continue in the same hands; but where it [1261b] is
not (as nature has made all men equal, and therefore it is just, be the
administration good or bad, that all should partake of it), there it is
best to observe a rotation, and let those who are their equals by turns
submit to those who are at that time magistrates, as they will, in their
turns, alternately be governors and governed, as if they were different
men: by the same method different persons will execute different
offices. From hence it is evident, that a city cannot be one in the
manner that some persons propose; and that what has been said to be the
greatest good which it could enjoy, is absolutely its destruction, which
cannot be: for the good of anything is that which preserves it.
For another reason also it is clear, that it is not for the best
to endeavour to make a city too much one, because a family is more
sufficient in itself than a single person, a city than a family; and
indeed Plato supposes that a city owes its existence to that sufficiency
in themselves which the members of it enjoy. If then this sufficiency is
so desirable, the less the city is one the better.




CHAPTER III


But admitting that it is most advantageous for a city to be one as much
as possible, it does not seem to follow that this will take place by
permitting all at once to say this is mine, and this is not mine (though
this is what Socrates regards as a proof that a city is entirely one),
for the word All is used in two senses; if it means each individual,
what Socrates proposes will nearly take place; for each person will
say, this is his own son, and his own wife, and his own property, and
of everything else that may happen to belong to him, that it is his own.
But those who have their wives and children in common will not say so,
but all will say so, though not as individuals; therefore, to use the
word all is evidently a fallacious mode of speech; for this word is
sometimes used distributively, and sometimes collectively, on account
of its double meaning, and is the cause of inconclusive syllogisms in
reasoning. Therefore for all persons to say the same thing was their
own, using the word all in its distributive sense, would be well, but is
impossible: in its collective sense it would by no means contribute to
the concord of the state. Besides, there would be another inconvenience
attending this proposal, for what is common to many is taken least care
of; for all men regard more what is their own than what others share
with them in, to which they pay less attention than is incumbent on
every one: let me add also, that every one is more negligent of what
another is to see to, as well as himself, than of his own private
business; as in a family one is often worse served by many servants than
by a few. Let each citizen then in the state have a thousand children,
but let none of them be considered as the children of that individual,
but let the relation of father and child be common to them all, and they
will all be neglected. Besides, in consequence of this, [1262a] whenever
any citizen behaved well or ill, every person, be the number what it
would, might say, this is my son, or this man's or that; and in
this manner would they speak, and thus would they doubt of the whole
thousand, or of whatever number the city consisted; and it would be
uncertain to whom each child belonged, and when it was born, who was to
take care of it: and which do you think is better, for every one to say
this is mine, while they may apply it equally to two thousand or ten
thousand; or as we say, this is mine in our present forms of government,
where one man calls another his son, another calls that same person
his brother, another nephew, or some other relation, either by blood
or marriage, and first extends his care to him and his, while another
regards him as one of the same parish and the same tribe; and it is
better for any one to be a nephew in his private capacity than a son
after that manner. Besides, it will be impossible to prevent some
persons from suspecting that they are brothers and sisters, fathers and
mothers to each other; for, from the mutual likeness there is between
the sire and the offspring, they will necessarily conclude in what
relation they stand to each other, which circumstance, we are informed
by those writers who describe different parts of the world, does
sometimes happen; for in Upper Africa there are wives in common who
yet deliver their children to their respective fathers, being guided
by their likeness to them. There are also some mares and cows which
naturally bring forth their young so like the male, that we can easily
distinguish by which of them they were impregnated: such was the mare
called Just, in Pharsalia.




CHAPTER IV


Besides, those who contrive this plan of community cannot easily avoid
the following evils; namely, blows, murders involuntary or voluntary,
quarrels, and reproaches, all which it would be impious indeed to be
guilty of towards our fathers and mothers, or those who are nearly
related to us; though not to those who are not connected to us by any
tie of affinity: and certainly these mischiefs must necessarily happen
oftener amongst those who do not know how they are connected to each
other than those who do; and when they do happen, if it is among the
first of these, they admit of a legal expiation, but amongst the latter
that cannot be done. It is also absurd for those who promote a
community of children to forbid those who love each other from indulging
themselves in the last excesses of that passion, while they do not
restrain them from the passion itself, or those intercourses which are
of all things most improper, between a Father and a son, a brother and
a brother, and indeed the thing itself is most absurd. It is also
ridiculous to prevent this intercourse between the nearest relations,
for no other reason than the violence of the pleasure, while they think
that the relation of father and daughter, the brother and sister, is of
no consequence at all. It seems also more advantageous for the state,
that the husbandmen should have their wives and children in common than
the military, for there will be less affection [1262b] among them
in that case than when otherwise; for such persons ought to be under
subjection, that they may obey the laws, and not seek after innovations.
Upon the whole, the consequences of such a law as this would be directly
contrary to those things which good laws ought to establish, and which
Socrates endeavoured to establish by his regulations concerning women
and children: for we think that friendship is the greatest good which
can happen to any city, as nothing so much prevents seditions: and amity
in a city is what Socrates commends above all things, which appears
to be, as indeed he says, the effect of friendship; as we learn from
Aristophanes in the Erotics, who says, that those who love one another
from the excess of that passion, desire to breathe the same soul, and
from being two to be blended into one: from whence it would necessarily
follow, that both or one of them must be destroyed. But now in a city
which admits of this community, the tie of friendship must, from that
very cause, be extremely weak, when no father can say, this is my son;
or son, this is my father; for as a very little of what is sweet, being
mixed with a great deal of water is imperceptible after the mixture, so
must all family connections, and the names they go by, be necessarily
disregarded in such a community, it being then by no means necessary
that the father should have any regard for him he called a son, or
the brothers for those they call brothers. There are two things which
principally inspire mankind with care and love of their offspring,
knowing it is their own, and what ought to be the object of their
affection, neither of which can take place in this sort of community. As
for exchanging the children of the artificers and husbandmen with those
of the military, and theirs reciprocally with these, it will occasion
great confusion in whatever manner it shall be done; for of necessity,
those who carry the children must know from whom they took and to whom
they gave them; and by this means those evils which I have already
mentioned will necessarily be the more likely to happen, as blows,
incestuous love, murders, and the like; for those who are given from
their own parents to other citizens, the military, for instance, will
not call them brothers, sons, fathers, or mothers. The same thing
would happen to those of the military who were placed among the other
citizens; so that by this means every one would be in fear how to act
in consequence of consanguinity. And thus let us determine concerning a
community of wives and children.




CHAPTER V


We proceed next to consider in what manner property should be regulated
in a state which is formed after the most perfect mode of government,
whether it should be common or not; for this may be considered as a
separate question from what had been determined concerning [1263a] wives
and children; I mean, whether it is better that these should be held
separate, as they now everywhere are, or that not only possessions but
also the usufruct of them should be in common; or that the soil should
have a particular owner, but that the produce should be brought together
and used as one common stock, as some nations at present do; or on the
contrary, should the soil be common, and should it also be cultivated in
common, while the produce is divided amongst the individuals for their
particular use, which is said to be practised by some barbarians; or
shall both the soil and the fruit be common? When the business of
the husbandman devolves not on the citizen, the matter is much easier
settled; but when those labour together who have a common right of
possession, this may occasion several difficulties; for there may not
be an equal proportion between their labour and what they consume; and
those who labour hard and have but a small proportion of the produce,
will certainly complain of those who take a large share of it and do but
little for that. Upon the whole, as a community between man and man so
entire as to include everything possible, and thus to have all things
that man can possess in common, is very difficult, so is it particularly
so with respect to property; and this is evident from that community
which takes place between those who go out to settle a colony; for they
frequently have disputes with each other upon the most common occasions,
and come to blows upon trifles: we find, too, that we oftenest correct
those slaves who are generally employed in the common offices of the
family: a community of property then has these and other inconveniences
attending it.

But the manner of life which is now established, more particularly when
embellished with good morals and a system of equal laws, is far superior
to it, for it will have the advantage of both; by both I mean properties
being common, and divided also; for in some respects it ought to be in
a manner common, but upon the whole private: for every man's attention
being employed on his own particular concerns, will prevent mutual
complaints against each other; nay, by this means industry will be
increased, as each person will labour to improve his own private
property; and it will then be, that from a principle of virtue they will
mutually perform good offices to each other, according to the proverb,
"All things are common amongst friends;" and in some cities there are
traces of this custom to be seen, so that it is not impracticable, and
particularly in those which are best governed; some things are by this
means in a manner common, and others might be so; for there, every
person enjoying his own private property, some things he assists his
friend with, others are considered as in common; as in Lacedaemon, where
they use each other's slaves, as if they were, so to speak, their own,
as they do their horses and dogs, or even any provision they may want in
a journey.

It is evident then that it is best to have property private, but to make
the use of it common; but how the citizens are to be brought to it is
the particular [1263b] business of the legislator. And also with respect
to pleasure, it is unspeakable how advantageous it is, that a man should
think he has something which he may call his own; for it is by no means
to no purpose, that each person should have an affection for himself,
for that is natural, and yet to be a self-lover is justly censured; for
we mean by that, not one that simply loves himself, but one that loves
himself more than he ought; in like manner we blame a money-lover,
and yet both money and self is what all men love. Besides, it is very
pleasing to us to oblige and assist our friends and companions, as well
as those whom we are connected with by the rights of hospitality; and
this cannot be done without the establishment of private property, which
cannot take place with those who make a city too much one; besides, they
prevent every opportunity of exercising two principal virtues, modesty
and liberality. Modesty with respect to the female sex, for this virtue
requires you to abstain from her who is another's; liberality, which
depends upon private property, for without that no one can appear
liberal, or do any generous action; for liberality consists in imparting
to others what is our own.

This system of polity does indeed recommend itself by its good
appearance and specious pretences to humanity; and when first proposed
to any one, must give him great pleasure, as he will conclude it to be
a wonderful bond of friendship, connecting all to all; particularly
when any one censures the evils which are now to be found in society,
as arising from properties not being common, I mean the disputes which
happen between man and man, upon their different contracts with each
other; those judgments which are passed in court in consequence of
fraud, and perjury, and flattering the rich, none of which arise from
properties being private, but from the vices of mankind. Besides,
those who live in one general community, and have all things in common,
oftener dispute with each other than those who have their property
separate; from the very small number indeed of those who have their
property in common, compared with those where it is appropriated,
the instances of their quarrels are but few. It is also but right to
mention, not only the inconveniences they are preserved from who live in
a communion of goods, but also the advantages they are deprived of; for
when the whole comes to be considered, this manner of life will be found
impracticable.

We must suppose, then, that Socrates's mistake arose from the principle
he set out with being false; we admit, indeed, that both a family and a
city ought to be one in some particulars, but not entirely; for there
is a point beyond which if a city proceeds in reducing itself to one, it
will be no longer a city.

There is also another point at which it will still continue to be a
city, but it will approach so near to not being one, that it will be
worse than none; as if any one should reduce the voices of those who
sing in concert to one, or a verse to a foot. But the people ought to
be made one, and a community, as I have already said, by education;
as property at Lacedaemon, and their public tables at Crete, were made
common by their legislators. But yet, whosoever shall introduce any
education, and think thereby to make his city excellent and respectable,
will be absurd, while he expects to form it by such regulations, and not
by manners, philosophy, and laws. And whoever [1264a] would establish
a government upon a community of goods, ought to know that he should
consult the experience of many years, which would plainly enough inform
him whether such a scheme is useful; for almost all things have already
been found out, but some have been neglected, and others which have been
known have not been put in practice. But this would be most evident, if
any one could see such a government really established: for it would be
impossible to frame such a city without dividing and separating it into
its distinct parts, as public tables, wards, and tribes; so that here
the laws will do nothing more than forbid the military to engage
in agriculture, which is what the Lacedaemonians are at present
endeavouring to do.

Nor has Socrates told us (nor is it easy to say) what plan of government
should be pursued with respect to the individuals in the state where
there is a community of goods established; for though the majority
of his citizens will in general consist of a multitude of persons of
different occupations, of those he has determined nothing; whether the
property of the husbandman ought to be in common, or whether each person
should have his share to himself; and also, whether their wives and
children ought to be in common: for if all things are to be alike common
to all, where will be the difference between them and the military, or
what would they get by submitting to their government? and upon what
principles would they do it, unless they should establish the wise
practice of the Cretans? for they, allowing everything else to their
slaves, forbid them only gymnastic exercises and the use of arms. And if
they are not, but these should be in the same situation with respect to
their property which they are in other cities, what sort of a community
will there be? in one city there must of necessity be two, and those
contrary to each other; for he makes the military the guardians of the
state, and the husbandman, artisans, and others, citizens; and all those
quarrels, accusations, and things of the like sort, which he says are
the bane of other cities, will be found in his also: notwithstanding
Socrates says they will not want many laws in consequence of their
education, but such only as may be necessary for regulating the streets,
the markets, and the like, while at the same time it is the education of
the military only that he has taken any care of. Besides, he makes the
husbandmen masters of property upon paying a tribute; but this would
be likely to make them far more troublesome and high-spirited than the
Helots, the Penestise, or the slaves which others employ; nor has he
ever determined whether it is necessary to give any attention to them
in these particulars, nor thought of what is connected therewith,
their polity, their education, their laws; besides, it is of no little
consequence, nor is it easy to determine, how these should be framed so
as to preserve the community of the military.

Besides, if he makes the wives common, while the property [1264b]
continues separate, who shall manage the domestic concerns with the same
care which the man bestows upon his fields? nor will the inconvenience
be remedied by making property as well as wives common; and it is absurd
to draw a comparison from the brute creation, and say, that the same
principle should regulate the connection of a man and a woman which
regulates theirs amongst whom there is no family association.

It is also very hazardous to settle the magistracy as Socrates has
done; for he would have persons of the same rank always in office, which
becomes the cause of sedition even amongst those who are of no account,
but more particularly amongst those who are of a courageous and warlike
disposition; it is indeed evidently necessary that he should frame his
community in this manner; for that golden particle which God has mixed
up in the soul of man flies not from one to the other, but always
continues with the same; for he says, that some of our species have
gold, and others silver, blended in their composition from the moment of
their birth: but those who are to be husbandmen and artists, brass and
iron; besides, though he deprives the military of happiness, he says,
that the legislator ought to make all the citizens happy; but it
is impossible that the whole city can be happy, without all, or the
greater, or some part of it be happy. For happiness is not like
that numerical equality which arises from certain numbers when added
together, although neither of them may separately contain it; for
happiness cannot be thus added together, but must exist in every
individual, as some properties belong to every integral; and if the
military are not happy, who else are so? for the artisans are not, nor
the multitude of those who are employed in inferior offices. The state
which Socrates has described has all these defects, and others which are
not of less consequence.




CHAPTER VI


It is also nearly the same in the treatise upon Laws which was writ
afterwards, for which reason it will be proper in this place to consider
briefly what he has there said upon government, for Socrates has
thoroughly settled but very few parts of it; as for instance, in what
manner the community of wives and children ought to be regulated, how
property should be established, and government conducted.

Now he divides the inhabitants into two parts, husbandmen and soldiers,
and from these he select a third part who are to be senators and govern
the city; but he has not said whether or no the husbandman and artificer
shall have any or what share in the government, or whether they shall
have arms, and join with the others in war, or not. He thinks also
that the women ought to go to war, and have the same education as the
soldiers; as to other particulars, he has filled his treatise with
matter foreign to the purpose; and with respect to education, he has
only said what that of the guards ought to be.

[1265a] As to his book of Laws, laws are the principal thing which that
contains, for he has there said but little concerning government; and
this government, which he was so desirous of framing in such a manner as
to impart to its members a more entire community of goods than is to be
found in other cities, he almost brings round again to be the same
as that other government which he had first proposed; for except the
community of wives and goods, he has framed both his governments alike,
for the education of the citizens is to be the same in both; they are in
both to live without any servile employ, and their common tables are to
be the same, excepting that in that he says the women should have common
tables, and that there should be a thousand men-at-arms, in this, that
there should be five thousand.

All the discourses of Socrates are masterly, noble, new, and
inquisitive; but that they are all true it may probably be too much
to say. For now with respect to the number just spoken of, it must be
acknowledged that he would want the country of Babylonia for them, or
some one like it, of an immeasurable extent, to support five thousand
idle persons, besides a much greater number of women and servants. Every
one, it is true, may frame an hypothesis as he pleases, but yet it ought
to be possible. It has been said, that a legislator should have two
things in view when he frames his laws, the country and the people. He
will also do well, if he has some regard to the neighbouring states, if
he intends that his community should maintain any political intercourse
with them, for it is not only necessary that they should understand that
practice of war which is adapted to their own country, but to others
also; for admitting that any one chooses not this life either in
public or private, yet there is not the less occasion for their being
formidable to their enemies, not only when they invade their country,
but also when they retire out of it.

It may also be considered whether the quantity of each person's property
may not be settled in a different manner from what he has done it in,
by making it more determinate; for he says, that every one ought to have
enough whereon to live moderately, as if any one had said to live well,
which is the most comprehensive expression. Besides, a man may live
moderately and miserably at the same time; he had therefore better
have proposed, that they should live both moderately and liberally;
for unless these two conspire, luxury will come in on the one hand, or
wretchedness on the other, since these two modes of living are the only
ones applicable to the employment of our substance; for we cannot say
with respect to a man's fortune, that he is mild or courageous, but we
may say that he is prudent and liberal, which are the only qualities
connected therewith.

It is also absurd to render property equal, and not to provide for
the increasing number of the citizens; but to leave that circumstance
uncertain, as if it would regulate itself according to the number of
women who [1265b] should happen to be childless, let that be what it
would because this seems to take place in other cities; but the case
would not be the same in such a state which he proposes and those which
now actually unite; for in these no one actually wants, as the property
is divided amongst the whole community, be their numbers what they will;
but as it could not then be divided, the supernumeraries, whether they
were many or few, would have nothing at all. But it is more necessary
than even to regulate property, to take care that the increase of the
people should not exceed a certain number; and in determining that,
to take into consideration those children who will die, and also those
women who will be barren; and to neglect this, as is done in several
cities, is to bring certain poverty on the citizens; and poverty is the
cause of sedition and evil. Now Phidon the Corinthian, one of the oldest
legislators, thought the families and the number of the citizens should
continue the same; although it should happen that all should have
allotments at the first, disproportionate to their numbers.

In Plato's Laws it is however different; we shall mention hereafter what
we think would be best in these particulars. He has also neglected in
that treatise to point out how the governors are to be distinguished
from the governed; for he says, that as of one sort of wool the warp
ought to be made, and of another the woof, so ought some to govern, and
others to be governed. But since he admits, that all their property may
be increased fivefold, why should he not allow the same increase to the
country? he ought also to consider whether his allotment of the houses
will be useful to the community, for he appoints two houses to each
person, separate from each other; but it is inconvenient for a person
to inhabit two houses. Now he is desirous to have his whole plan of
government neither a democracy nor an oligarchy, but something between
both, which he calls a polity, for it is to be composed of men-at-arms.
If Plato intended to frame a state in which more than in any other
everything should be common, he has certainly given it a right name;
but if he intended it to be the next in perfection to that which he had
already framed, it is not so; for perhaps some persons will give the
preference to the Lacedaemonian form of government, or some other which
may more completely have attained to the aristocratic form.

Some persons say, that the most perfect government should be composed
of all others blended together, for which reason they commend that
of Lacedaemon; for they say, that this is composed of an oligarchy,
a monarchy, and a democracy, their kings representing the monarchical
part, the senate the oligarchical; and, that in the ephori may be found
the democratical, as these are taken from the people. But some say, that
in the ephori is absolute power, and that it is their common meal and
daily course of life, in which the democratical form is represented.
It is also said in this treatise of [1266a] Laws, that the best form of
government must, be one composed of a democracy and a tyranny; though
such a mixture no one else would ever allow to be any government at all,
or if it is, the worst possible; those propose what is much better who
blend many governments together; for the most perfect is that which is
formed of many parts. But now in this government of Plato's there are
no traces of a monarchy, only of an oligarchy and democracy; though he
seems to choose that it should rather incline to an oligarchy, as is
evident from the appointment of the magistrates; for to choose them by
lot is common to both; but that a man of fortune must necessarily be a
member of the assembly, or to elect the magistrates, or take part in the
management of public affairs, while others are passed over, makes the
state incline to an oligarchy; as does the endeavouring that the
greater part of the rich may be in office, and that the rank of their
appointments may correspond with their fortunes.

The same principle prevails also in the choice of their senate; the
manner of electing which is favourable also to an oligarchy; for all
are obliged to vote for those who are senators of the first class,
afterwards they vote for the same number out of the second, and then out
of the third; but this compulsion to vote at the election of senators
does not extend to the third and fourth classes and the first and second
class only are obliged to vote for the fourth. By this means he says
he shall necessarily have an equal number of each rank, but he is
mistaken--for the majority will always consist of those of the first
rank, and the most considerable people; and for this reason, that
many of the commonalty not being obliged to it, will not attend the
elections. From hence it is evident, that such a state will not consist
of a democracy and a monarchy, and this will be further proved by
what we shall say when we come particularly to consider this form of
government.

There will also great danger arise from the manner of electing the
senate, when those who are elected themselves are afterwards to elect
others; for by this means, if a certain number choose to combine
together, though not very considerable, the election will always fall
according to their pleasure. Such are the things which Plato proposes
concerning government in his book of Laws.




CHAPTER VII


There are also some other forms of government, which have been proposed
either by private persons, or philosophers, or politicians, all of which
come much nearer to those which have been really established, or now
exist, than these two of Plato's; for neither have they introduced the
innovation of a community of wives and children, and public tables for
the women, but have been contented to set out with establishing such
rules as are absolutely necessary.

There are some persons who think, that the first object of government
should be to regulate well everything relating to private property;
for they say, that a neglect herein is the source of all seditions
whatsoever. For this reason, Phaleas the Chalcedonian first proposed,
that the fortunes of the citizens should be equal, which he thought was
not difficult to accomplish when a community was first settled, but
that it was a work of greater difficulty in one that had been long
established; but yet that it might be effected, and an equality of
circumstances introduced by these means, that the rich should give
marriage portions, but never receive any, while the poor should always
receive, but never give.

But Plato, in his treatise of Laws, thinks that a difference in
circumstances should be permitted to a certain degree; but that no
citizen should be allowed to possess more than five times as much as the
lowest census, as we have already mentioned. But legislators who
would establish this principle are apt to overlook what they ought to
consider; that while they regulate the quantity of provisions which each
individual shall possess, they ought also to regulate the number of his
children; for if these exceed the allotted quantity of provision, the
law must necessarily be repealed; and yet, in spite of the repeal, it
will have the bad effect of reducing many from wealth to poverty, so
difficult is it for innovators not to fall into such mistakes. That an
equality of goods was in some degree serviceable to strengthen the bands
of society, seems to have been known to some of the ancients; for Solon
made a law, as did some others also, to restrain persons from possessing
as much land as they pleased. And upon the same principle there are laws
which forbid men to sell their property, as among the Locrians, unless
they can prove that some notorious misfortune has befallen them. They
were also to preserve their ancient patrimony, which custom being broken
through by the Leucadians, made their government too democratic; for
by that means it was no longer necessary to be possessed of a certain
fortune to be qualified to be a magistrate. But if an equality of goods
is established, this may be either too much, when it enables the people
to live luxuriously, or too little, when it obliges them to live
hard. Hence it is evident, that it is not proper for the legislator
to establish an equality of circumstances, but to fix a proper medium.
Besides, if any one should regulate the division of property in such a
manner that there should be a moderate sufficiency for all, it would
be of no use; for it is of more consequence that the citizen should
entertain a similarity of sentiments than an equality of circumstances;
but this can never be attained unless they are properly educated under
the direction of the law. But probably Phaleas may say, that this in
what he himself mentions; for he both proposes a equality of property
and one plan of education in his city. But he should have said
particularly what education he intended, nor is it of any service to
have this to much one; for this education may be one, and yet such as
will make the citizens over-greedy, to grasp after honours, or riches,
or both. Besides, not only an inequality of possessions, but also
of honours, will occasion [1267a] seditions, but this upon contrary
grounds; for the vulgar will be seditious if there be an inequality of
goods, by those of more elevated sentiments, if there is an equality of
honours.

  "When good and bad do equal honours share."

For men are not guilty of crimes for necessaries only (for which he
thinks an equality of goods would be a sufficient remedy, as they would
then have no occasion to steal cold or hunger), but that they may enjoy
what they desire, and not wish for it in vain; for if their desire extend
beyond the common necessaries of life, they were be wicked to gratify
them; and not only so, but if their wishes point that way, they will do
the same to enjoy those pleasures which are free from the alloy of pain.
What remedy then shall we find for these three disorders? And first,
to prevent stealing from necessity, let every one be supplied with a
moderate subsistence, which may make the addition of his own industry
necessary; second to prevent stealing to procure the luxuries of life,
temperance be enjoined; and thirdly, let those who wish for pleasure in
itself seek for it only in philosophy, all others want the assistance of
men.

Since then men are guilty of the greatest crimes from ambition, and not
from necessity, no one, for instance aims at being a tyrant to keep him
from the cold, hence great honour is due to him who kills not a thief,
but tyrant; so that polity which Phaleas establishes would only be
salutary to prevent little crimes. He has also been very desirous to
establish such rules as will conduce to perfect the internal policy of
his state, and he ought also to have done the same with respect to
its neighbours and all foreign nations; for the considerations of the
military establishment should take place in planning every government,
that it may not be unprovided in case of a war, of which he has said
nothing; so also with respect to property, it ought not only to be
adapted to the exigencies of the state, but also to such dangers as may
arise from without.

Thus it should not be so much as to tempt those who are near, and more
powerful to invade it, while those who possess it are not able to drive
out the invaders, nor so little as that the state should not be able to
go to war with those who are quite equal to itself, and of this he has
determined nothing; it must indeed be allowed that it is advantageous to
a community to be rather rich than poor; probably the proper boundary is
this, not to possess enough to make it worth while for a more powerful
neighbour to attack you, any more than he would those who had not so
much as yourself; thus when Autophradatus proposed to besiege Atarneus,
Eubulus advised him to consider what time it would require to take the
city, and then would have him determine whether it would answer, for
that he should choose, if it would even take less than he proposed,
to quit the place; his saying this made Autophradatus reflect upon the
business and give over the siege. There is, indeed, some advantage in an
equality of goods amongst the citizens to prevent seditions; and yet,
to say truth, no very great one; for men of great abilities will stomach
their being put upon a level with the rest of the community. For
which reason they will very often appear ready for every commotion and
sedition; for the wickedness of mankind is insatiable. For though
at first two oboli might be sufficient, yet when once it is become
customary, they continually want something more, until they set no
limits to their expectations; for it is the nature of our desires to be
boundless, and many live only to gratify them. But for this purpose the
first object is, not so much to establish an equality of fortune, as
to prevent those who are of a good disposition from desiring more than
their own, and those who are of a bad one from being able to acquire it;
and this may be done if they are kept in an inferior station, and not
exposed to injustice. Nor has he treated well the equality of goods, for
he has extended his regulation only to land; whereas a man's substance
consists not only in this, but also in slaves, cattle, money, and all
that variety of things which fall under the name of chattels; now there
must be either an equality established in all these, or some certain
rule, or they must be left entirely at large. It appears too by his
laws, that he intends to establish only a small state, as all the
artificers are to belong to the public, and add nothing to the
complement of citizens; but if all those who are to be employed in
public works are to be the slaves of the public, it should be done
in the same manner as it is at Epidamnum, and as Diophantus formerly
regulated it at Athens. From these particulars any one may nearly judge
whether Phaleas's community is well or ill established.




CHAPTER VIII


Hippodamus, the son of Euruphon a Milesian, contrived the art of laying
out towns, and separated the Pireus. This man was in other respects
too eager after notice, and seemed to many to live in a very affected
manner, with his flowing locks and his expensive ornaments, and a coarse
warm vest which he wore, not only in the winter, but also in the
hot weather. As he was very desirous of the character of a universal
scholar, he was the first who, not being actually engaged in the
management of public affairs, sat himself to inquire what sort of
government was best; and he planned a state, consisting of ten thousand
persons, divided into three parts, one consisting of artisans, another
of husbandmen, and the third of soldiers; he also divided the lands into
three parts, and allotted one to sacred purposes, another to the public,
and the third to individuals. The first of these was to supply what was
necessary for the established worship of the gods; the second was to
be allotted to the support of the soldiery; and the third was to be
the property of the husbandman. He thought also that there need only be
three sorts of laws, corresponding to the three sorts of actions which
can be brought, namely, for assault, trespasses, or death. He ordered
also that there should be a particular court of appeal, into which
all causes might be removed which were supposed to have been unjustly
determined elsewhere; which court should be composed of old men chosen
for that purpose. He thought also [1268a] that they should not pass
sentence by votes; but that every one should bring with him a tablet, on
which he should write, that he found the party guilty, if it was so, but
if not, he should bring a plain tablet; but if he acquitted him of one
part of the indictment but not of the other, he should express that
also on the tablet; for he disapproved of that general custom already
established, as it obliges the judges to be guilty of perjury if they
determined positively either on the one side or the other. He also made
a law, that those should be rewarded who found out anything for the good
of the city, and that the children of those who fell in battle should be
educated at the public expense; which law had never been proposed by any
other legislator, though it is at present in use at Athens as well as in
other cities, he would have the magistrates chosen out of the people
in general, by whom he meant the three parts before spoken of; and that
those who were so elected should be the particular guardians of what
belonged to the public, to strangers, and to orphans.

These are the principal parts and most worthy of notice in Hippodamus's
plan. But some persons might doubt the propriety of his division of the
citizens into three parts; for the artisans, the husbandmen, and the
soldiers are to compose one community, where the husbandmen are to have
no arms, and the artisans neither arms nor land, which would in a manner
render them slaves to the soldiery. It is also impossible that the whole
community should partake of all the honourable employments in it--for
the generals and the guardians of the state must necessarily be
appointed out of the soldiery, and indeed the most honourable
magistrates; but as the two other parts will not have their share in the
government, how can they be expected to have any affection for it? But
it is necessary that the soldiery should be superior to the other two
parts, and this superiority will not be easily gained without they are
very numerous; and if they are so, why should the community consist
of any other members? why should any others have a right to elect the
magistrates? Besides, of what use are the husbandmen to this community?
Artisans, 'tis true, are necessary, for these every city wants, and they
can live upon their business. If the husbandmen indeed furnished the
soldiers with provisions, they would be properly part of the community;
but these are supposed to have their private property, and to cultivate
it for their own use. Moreover, if the soldiers themselves are to
cultivate that common land which is appropriated for their support,
there will be no distinction between the soldier and the husbandman,
which the legislator intended there should be; and if there should be
any others who are to cultivate the private property of the husbandman
and the common lands of the military, there will be a fourth order in
the state which will have no share in it, and always entertain hostile
sentiments towards it. If any one should propose that the same persons
should cultivate their own lands and the public ones also, then there
would be a deficiency [1268b] of provisions to supply two families,
as the lands would not immediately yield enough for themselves and the
soldiers also; and all these things would occasion great confusion.

Nor do I approve of his method of determining causes, when he would
have the judge split the case which comes simply before him; and thus,
instead of being a judge, become an arbitrator. Now when any matter
is brought to arbitration, it is customary for many persons to confer
together upon the business that is before them; but when a cause is
brought before judges it is not so; and many legislators take care
that the judges shall not have it in their power to communicate their
sentiments to each other. Besides, what can prevent confusion on the
bench when one judge thinks a fine should be different from what another
has set it at; one proposing twenty minae, another ten, or be it more
or less, another four, and another five; and it is evident, that in this
manner they will differ from each other, while some will give the whole
damages sued for, and others nothing; in this situation, how shall their
determinations be settled? Besides, a judge cannot be obliged to perjure
himself who simply acquits or condemns, if the action is fairly and
justly brought; for he who acquits the party does not say that he ought
not to pay any fine at all, but that he ought not to pay a fine of
twenty minae. But he that condemns him is guilty of perjury if he
sentences him to pay twenty minae while he believes the damages ought
not to be so much.

Now with respect to these honours which he proposes to bestow on those
who can give any information useful to the community, this, though very
pleasing in speculation, is what the legislator should not settle, for
it would encourage informers, and probably occasion commotions in the
state. And this proposal of his gives rise also to further conjectures
and inquiries; for some persons have doubted whether it is useful or
hurtful to alter the established law of any country, if even for the
better; for which reason one cannot immediately determine upon what he
here says, whether it is advantageous to alter the law or not. We know,
indeed, that it is possible to propose to new model both the laws and
government as a common good; and since we have mentioned this subject,
it may be very proper to enter into a few particulars concerning it, for
it contains some difficulties, as I have already said, and it may appear
better to alter them, since it has been found useful in other sciences.

Thus the science of physic is extended beyond its ancient bounds; so is
the gymnastic, and indeed all other arts and powers; so that one may lay
it down for certain that the same thing will necessarily hold good in
the art of government. And it may also be affirmed, that experience
itself gives a proof of this; for the ancient laws are too simple and
barbarous; which allowed the Greeks to wear swords in the city, and to
buy their wives of each [1269a]. other. And indeed all the remains of
old laws which we have are very simple; for instance, a law in Cuma
relative to murder. If any person who prosecutes another for murder can
produce a certain number of witnesses to it of his own relations, the
accused person shall be held guilty. Upon the whole, all persons ought
to endeavour to follow what is right, and not what is established; and
it is probable that the first men, whether they sprung out of the earth,
or were saved from some general calamity, had very little understanding
or knowledge, as is affirmed of these aborigines; so that it would be
absurd to continue in the practice of their rules. Nor is it, moreover,
right to permit written laws always to remain without alteration; for
as in all other sciences, so in politics, it is impossible to express
everything in writing with perfect exactness; for when we commit
anything to writing we must use general terms, but in every action there
is something particular to itself, which these may not comprehend; from
whence it is evident, that certain laws will at certain times admit of
alterations. But if we consider this matter in another point of view, it
will appear to require great caution; for when the advantage proposed is
trifling, as the accustoming the people easily to abolish their laws
is of bad consequence, it is evidently better to pass over some faults
which either the legislator or the magistrates may have committed; for
the alterations will not be of so much service as a habit of disobeying
the magistrates will be of disservice. Besides, the instance brought
from the arts is fallacious; for it is not the same thing to alter the
one as the other. For a law derives all its strength from custom, and
this requires long time to establish; so that, to make it an easy matter
to pass from the established laws to other new ones, is to weaken the
power of laws. Besides, here is another question; if the laws are to be
altered, are they all to be altered, and in every government or not, and
whether at the pleasure of one person or many? all which particulars
will make a great difference; for which reason we will at present drop
the inquiry, to pursue it at some other time.




CHAPTER IX


There are two considerations which offer themselves with respect to the
government established at Lacedaemon and Crete, and indeed in almost all
other states whatsoever; one is whether their laws do or do not promote
the best establishment possible? the other is whether there is anything,
if we consider either the principles upon which it is founded or the
executive part of it, which prevents the form of government that they
had proposed to follow from being observed; now it is allowed that in
every well-regulated state the members of it should be free from servile
labour; but in what manner this shall be effected is not so easy to
determine; for the Penestse have very often attacked the Thessalians,
and the Helots the Lacedaemonians, for they in a manner continually
watch an opportunity for some misfortune befalling them. But no such
thing has ever happened to the Cretans; the [1269b] reason for which
probably is, that although they are engaged in frequent wars with the
neighbouring cities, yet none of these would enter into an alliance with
the revolters, as it would be disadvantageous for them, who themselves
also have their villains. But now there is perpetual enmity between the
Lacedaemonians and all their neighbours, the Argives, the Messenians,
and the Arcadians. Their slaves also first revolted from the Thessalians
while they were engaged in wars with their neighbours the Acheans, the
Perrabeans, and the Magnesians. It seems to me indeed, if nothing else,
yet something very troublesome to keep upon proper terms with them;
for if you are remiss in your discipline they grow insolent, and think
themselves upon an equality with their masters; and if they are hardly
used they are continually plotting against you and hate you. It is
evident, then, that those who employ slaves have not as yet hit upon the
right way of managing them.

As to the indulging of women in any particular liberties, it is hurtful
to the end of government and the prosperity of the city; for as a man
and his wife are the two parts of a family, if we suppose a city to be
divided into two parts, we must allow that the number of men and women
will be equal.

In whatever city then the women are not under good regulations, we must
look upon one half of it as not under the restraint of law, as it
there happened; for the legislator, desiring to make his whole city
a collection of warriors with respect to the men, he most evidently
accomplished his design; but in the meantime the women were quite
neglected, for they live without restraint in every improper indulgence
and luxury. So that in such a state riches will necessarily be in
general esteem, particularly if the men are governed by their wives,
which has been the case with many a brave and warlike people except
the Celts, and those other nations, if there are any such, who openly
practise pederasty. And the first mythologists seem not improperly to
have joined Mars and Venus together; for all nations of this character
are greatly addicted either to the love of women or of boys, for which
reason it was thus at Lacedaemon; and many things in their state were
done by the authority of the women. For what is the difference, if the
power is in the hands of the women, or in the hands of those whom they
themselves govern? it must turn to the same account. As this boldness of
the women can be of no use in any common occurrences, if it was ever so,
it must be in war; but even here we find that the Lacedaemonian women
were of the greatest disservice, as was proved at the time of the Theban
invasion, when they were of no use at all, as they are in other cities,
but made more disturbance than even the enemy.

The origin of this indulgence which the Lacedaemonian women enjoy is
easily accounted for, from the long time the men were absent from home
upon foreign expeditions [1270a] against the Argives, and afterwards the
Arcadians and Messenians, so that, when these wars were at an end, their
military life, in which there is no little virtue, prepared them to obey
the precepts of their law-giver; but we are told, that when Lycurgus
endeavoured also to reduce the women to an obedience to his laws, upon
their refusal he declined it. It may indeed be said that the women were
the causes of these things, and of course all the fault was theirs. But
we are not now considering where the fault lies, or where it does not
lie, but what is right and what is wrong; and when the manners of the
women are not well regulated, as I have already said, it must not only
occasion faults which are disgraceful to the state, but also increase
the love of money. In the next place, fault may be found with his
unequal division of property, for some will have far too much, others
too little; by which means the land will come into few hands, which
business is badly regulated by his laws. For he made it infamous for any
one either to buy or sell their possessions, in which he did right; but
he permitted any one that chose it to give them away, or bequeath them,
although nearly the same consequences will arise from one practice as
from the other. It is supposed that near two parts in five of the whole
country is the property of women, owing to their being so often sole
heirs, and having such large fortunes in marriage; though it would
be better to allow them none, or a little, or a certain regulated
proportion. Now every one is permitted to make a woman his heir if he
pleases; and if he dies intestate, he who succeeds as heir at law gives
it to whom he pleases. From whence it happens that although the country
is able to support fifteen hundred horse and thirty thousand foot, the
number does not amount to one thousand.

And from these facts it is evident, that this particular is badly
regulated; for the city could not support one shock, but was ruined for
want of men. They say, that during the reigns of their ancient kings
they used to present foreigners with the freedom of their city, to
prevent there being a want of men while they carried on long wars; it is
also affirmed that the number of Spartans was formerly ten thousand; but
be that as it will, an equality of property conduces much to increase
the number of the people. The law, too, which he made to encourage
population was by no means calculated to correct this inequality;
for being willing that the Spartans should be as numerous as [1270b]
possible, to make them desirous of having large families he ordered that
he who had three children should be excused the night-watch, and that he
who had four should pay no taxes: though it is very evident, that while
the land was divided in this manner, that if the people increased there
must many of them be very poor.

Nor was he less blamable for the manner in which he constituted the
ephori; for these magistrates take cognisance of things of the last
importance, and yet they are chosen out of the people in general; so
that it often happens that a very poor person is elected to that office,
who, from that circumstance, is easily bought. There have been many
instances of this formerly, as well as in the late affair at Andros. And
these men, being corrupted with money, went as far as they could to ruin
the city: and, because their power was too great and nearly tyrannical,
their kings were obliged to natter them, which contributed greatly to
hurt the state; so that it altered from an aristocracy to a democracy.
This magistracy is indeed the great support of the state; for the people
are easy, knowing that they are eligible to the first office in it;
so that, whether it took place by the intention of the legislator,
or whether it happened by chance, this is of great service to their
affairs; for it is necessary that every member of the state should
endeavour that each part of the government should be preserved, and
continue the same. And upon this principle their kings have always
acted, out of regard to their honour; the wise and good from their
attachment to the senate, a seat wherein they consider as the reward of
virtue; and the common people, that they may support the ephori, of whom
they consist. And it is proper that these magistrates should be chosen
out of the whole community, not as the custom is at present, which is
very ridiculous. The ephori are the supreme judges in causes of the last
consequence; but as it is quite accidental what sort of persons they may
be, it is not right that they should determine according to their own
opinion, but by a written law or established custom. Their way of life
also is not consistent with the manners of the city, for it is too
indulgent; whereas that of others is too severe; so that they cannot
support it, but are obliged privately to act contrary to law, that they
may enjoy some of the pleasures of sense. There are also great defects
in the institution of their senators. If indeed they were fitly trained
to the practice of every human virtue, every one would readily admit
that they would be useful to the government; but still it might be
debated whether they should be continued judges for life, to determine
points of the greatest moment, since the mind has its old age as well
as the body; but as they are so brought up, [1271a] that even the
legislator could not depend upon them as good men, their power must
be inconsistent with the safety of the state: for it is known that the
members of that body have been guilty both of bribery and partiality in
many public affairs; for which reason it had been much better if they
had been made answerable for their conduct, which they are not. But it
may be said the ephori seem to have a check upon all the magistrates.
They have indeed in this particular very great power; but I affirm that
they should not be entrusted with this control in the manner they are.
Moreover, the mode of choice which they make use of at the election of
their senators is very childish. Nor is it right for any one to solicit
for a place he is desirous of; for every person, whether he chooses it
or not, ought to execute any office he is fit for. But his intention was
evidently the same in this as in the other parts of his government.
For making his citizens ambitious after honours, with men of that
disposition he has filled his senate, since no others will solicit for
that office; and yet the principal part of those crimes which men are
deliberately guilty of arise from ambition and avarice.

We will inquire at another time whether the office of a king is useful
to the state: thus much is certain, that they should be chosen from a
consideration of their conduct and not as they are now. But that the
legislator himself did not expect to make all his citizens honourable
and completely virtuous is evident from this, that he distrusts them as
not being good men; for he sent those upon the same embassy that were at
variance with each other; and thought, that in the dispute of the kings
the safety of the state consisted. Neither were their common meals at
first well established: for these should rather have been provided at
the public expense, as at Crete, where, as at Lacedaemon, every one was
obliged to buy his portion, although he might be very poor, and could by
no means bear the expense, by which means the contrary happened to what
the legislator desired: for he intended that those public meals should
strengthen the democratic part of his government: but this regulation
had quite the contrary effect, for those who were very poor could not
take part in them; and it was an observation of their forefathers, that
the not allowing those who could not contribute their proportion to the
common tables to partake of them, would be the ruin of the state. Other
persons have censured his laws concerning naval affairs, and not without
reason, as it gave rise to disputes. For the commander of the fleet is
in a manner set up in opposition to the kings, who are generals of the
army for life.

[1271b] There is also another defect in his laws worthy of censure,
which Plato has given in his book of Laws; that the whole constitution
was calculated only for the business of war: it is indeed excellent to
make them conquerors; for which reason the preservation of the state
depended thereon. The destruction of it commenced with their victories:
for they knew not how to be idle, or engage in any other employment
than war. In this particular also they were mistaken, that though they
rightly thought, that those things which are the objects of contention
amongst mankind are better procured by virtue than vice, yet they
wrongfully preferred the things themselves to virtue. Nor was the public
revenue well managed at Sparta, for the state was worth nothing while
they were obliged to carry on the most extensive wars, and the subsidies
were very badly raised; for as the Spartans possessed a large extent of
country, they were not exact upon each other as to what they paid in.
And thus an event contrary to the legislator's intention took place;
for the state was poor, the individuals avaricious. Enough of the
Lacedaemonian government; for these seem the chief defects in it.




CHAPTER X


The government of Crete bears a near resemblance to this, in some few
particulars it is not worse, but in general it is far inferior in its
contrivance. For it appears and is allowed in many particulars the
constitution of Lacedaemon was formed in imitation of that of Crete;
and in general most new things are an improvement upon the old. For they
say, that when Lycurgus ceased to be guardian to King Charilles he
went abroad and spent a long time with his relations in Crete, for the
Lycians are a colony of the Lacedaemonians; and those who first settled
there adopted that body of laws which they found already established by
the inhabitants; in like manner also those who now live near them have
the very laws which Minos first drew up.

This island seems formed by nature to be the mistress of Greece, for it
is entirely surrounded by a navigable ocean which washes almost all the
maritime parts of that country, and is not far distant on the one side
from Peloponnesus, on the other, which looks towards Asia, from Triopium
and Rhodes. By means of this situation Minos acquired the empire of
the sea and the islands; some of which he subdued, in others planted
colonies: at last he died at Camicus while he was attacking Sicily.
There is this analogy between the customs of the Lacedaemonians and
the Cretans, the Helots cultivate the grounds [1272a] for the one, the
domestic slaves for the other. Both states have their common meals, and
the Lacedaemonians called these formerly not _psiditia_ but _andpia_,
as the Cretans do; which proves from whence the custom arose. In this
particular their governments are also alike: the ephori have the same
power with those of Crete, who are called _kosmoi_; with this difference
only, that the number of the one is five, of the other ten. The senators
are the same as those whom the Cretans call the council. There was
formerly also a kingly power in Crete; but it was afterwards dissolved,
and the command of their armies was given to the _kosmoi_. Every one
also has a vote in their public assembly; but this has only the power of
confirming what has already passed the council and the _kosmoi_.

The Cretans conducted their public meals better than the Lacedaemonians,
for at Lacedaemon each individual was obliged to furnish what was
assessed upon him; which if he could not do, there was a law which
deprived him of the rights of a citizen, as has been already mentioned:
but in Crete they were furnished by the community; for all the corn and
cattle, taxes and contributions, which the domestic slaves were obliged
to furnish, were divided into parts and allotted to the gods, the
exigencies of the state, and these public meals; so that all the men,
women, and children were maintained from a common stock. The legislator
gave great attention to encourage a habit of eating sparingly, as very
useful to the citizens. He also endeavoured, that his community might
not be too populous, to lessen the connection with women, by introducing
the love of boys: whether in this he did well or ill we shall have some
other opportunity of considering. But that the public meals were better
ordered at Crete than at Lacedaemon is very evident.

The institution of the _kosmoi_, was still worse than that of the
ephori: for it contained all the faults incident to that magistracy and
some peculiar to itself; for in both cases it is uncertain who will be
elected: but the Lacedaemonians have this advantage which the others
have not, that as all are eligible, the whole community have a share
in the highest honours, and therefore all desire to preserve the state:
whereas among the Cretans the _kosmoi_ are not chosen out of the people
in general, but out of some certain families, and the senate out of the
_kosmoi_. And the same observations which may be made on the senate at
Lacedaemon may be applied to these; for their being under no control,
and their continuing for life, is an honour greater than they merit; and
to have their proceedings not regulated by a written law, but left to
their own discretion, is dangerous. (As to there being no insurrections,
although the people share not in the management of public affairs, this
is no proof of a well-constituted government, as the _kosmoi_ have no
opportunity of being bribed like the ephori, as they live in an [1272b]
island far from those who would corrupt them.) But the method they take
to correct that fault is absurd, impolitic, and tyrannical: for very
often either their fellow-magistrates or some private persons conspire
together and turn out the _kosmoi_. They are also permitted to resign
their office before their time is elapsed, and if all this was done by
law it would be well, and not at the pleasure of the individuals, which
is a bad rule to follow. But what is worst of all is, that general
confusion which those who are in power introduce to impede the ordinary
course of justice; which sufficiently shows what is the nature of the
government, or rather lawless force: for it is usual with the principal
persons amongst them to collect together some of the common people and
their friends, and then revolt and set up for themselves, and come
to blows with each other. And what is the difference, if a state is
dissolved at once by such violent means, or if it gradually so alters in
process of time as to be no longer the same constitution? A state like
this would ever be exposed to the invasions of those who were powerful
and inclined to attack it; but, as has been already mentioned, its
situation preserves it, as it is free from the inroads of foreigners;
and for this reason the family slaves still remain quiet at Crete, while
the Helots are perpetually revolting: for the Cretans take no part in
foreign affairs, and it is but lately that any foreign troops have
made an attack upon the island; and their ravages soon proved the
ineffectualness of their laws. And thus much for the government of
Crete.




CHAPTER XI


The government of Carthage seems well established, and in many respects
superior to others; in some particulars it bears a near resemblance
to the Lacedaemonians; and indeed these three states, the Cretans, the
Lacedaemonians and the Carthaginians are in some things very like
each other, in others they differ greatly. Amongst many excellent
constitutions this may show how well their government is framed, that
although the people are admitted to a share in the administration, the
form of it remains unaltered, without any popular insurrections, worth
notice, on the one hand, or degenerating into a tyranny on the
other. Now the Carthaginians have these things in common with the
Lacedaemonians: public tables for those who are connected together by
the tie of mutual friendship, after the manner of their Phiditia; they
have also a magistracy, consisting of an hundred and four persons,
similar to the ephori, or rather selected with more judgment; for
amongst the Lacedaemonians, all the citizens are eligible, but amongst
the Carthaginians, they are chosen out of those of the better sort:
there is also some analogy between the king and the senate in both these
governments, though the Carthaginian method of appointing their kings
is best, for they do not confine themselves to one family; nor do
they permit the election to be at large, nor have they any regard to
seniority; for if amongst the candidates there are any of greater merit
than the rest, these they prefer to those who may be older; for as their
power is very extensive, if they are [1273a] persons of no account,
they may be very hurtful to the state, as they have always been to
the Lacedaemonians; also the greater part of those things which become
reprehensible by their excess are common to all those governments which
we have described.

Now of those principles on which the Carthaginians have established
their mixed form of government, composed of an aristocracy and
democracy, some incline to produce a democracy, others an oligarchy: for
instance, if the kings and the senate are unanimous upon any point in
debate, they can choose whether they will bring it before the people or
no; but if they disagree, it is to these they must appeal, who are not
only to hear what has been approved of by the senate, but are finally
to determine upon it; and whosoever chooses it, has a right to speak
against any matter whatsoever that may be proposed, which is not
permitted in other cases. The five, who elect each other, have very
great and extensive powers; and these choose the hundred, who are
magistrates of the highest rank: their power also continues longer than
any other magistrates, for it commences before they come into office,
and is prolonged after they are out of it; and in this particular the
state inclines to an oligarchy: but as they are not elected by lot, but
by suffrage, and are not permitted to take money, they are the greatest
supporters imaginable of an aristocracy.

The determining all causes by the same magistrates, and not orae in one
court and another in another, as at Lacedaemon, has the same influence.
The constitution of Carthage is now shifting from an aristocracy to an
oligarchy, in consequence of an opinion which is favourably entertained
by many, who think that the magistrates in the community ought not to
be persons of family only, but of fortune also; as it is impossible
for those who are in bad circumstances to support the dignity of their
office, or to be at leisure to apply to public business. As choosing men
of fortune to be magistrates make a state incline to an oligarchy,
and men of abilities to an aristocracy, so is there a third method of
proceeding which took place in the polity of Carthage; for they have
an eye to these two particulars when they elect their officers,
particularly those of the highest rank, their kings and their generals.
It must be admitted, that it was a great fault in their legislator not
to guard against the constitution's degenerating from an aristocracy;
for this is a most necessary thing to provide for at first, that those
citizens who have the best abilities should never be obliged to do
anything unworthy their character, but be always at leisure to serve the
public, not only when in office, but also when private persons; for if
once you are obliged to look among the wealthy, that you may have men at
leisure to serve you, your greatest offices, of king and general,
will soon become venal; in consequence of which, riches will be more
honourable than virtue and a love of money be the ruling principle in
the city-for what those who have the chief power regard as honourable
will necessarily be the object which the [1273b] citizens in general
will aim at; and where the first honours are not paid to virtue,
there the aristocratic form of government cannot flourish: for it
is reasonable to conclude, that those who bought their places should
generally make an advantage of what they laid out their money for; as
it is absurd to suppose, that if a man of probity who is poor should be
desirous of gaining something, a bad man should not endeavour to do the
same, especially to reimburse himself; for which reason the magistracy
should be formed of those who are most able to support an aristocracy.
It would have been better for the legislature to have passed over the
poverty of men of merit, and only to have taken care to have ensured
them sufficient leisure, when in office, to attend to public affairs.

It seems also improper, that one person should execute several offices,
which was approved of at Carthage; for one business is best done by one
person; and it is the duty of the legislator to look to this, and not
make the same person a musician and a shoemaker: so that where the state
is not small it is more politic and more popular to admit many persons
to have a share in the government; for, as I just now said, it is not
only more usual, but everything is better and sooner done, when one
thing only is allotted to one person: and this is evident both in the
army and navy, where almost every one, in his turn, both commands and
is under command. But as their government inclines to an oligarchy, they
avoid the ill effects of it by always appointing some of the popular
party to the government of cities to make their fortunes. Thus they
consult this fault in their constitution and render it stable; but
this is depending on chance; whereas the legislator ought to frame his
government, that there the no room for insurrections. But now, if there
should be any general calamity, and the people should revolt from their
rulers, there is no remedy for reducing them to obedience by the laws.
And these are the particulars of the Lacedaemonian, the Cretan, and the
Carthaginian governments which seem worthy of commendation.




CHAPTER XII


Some of those persons who have written upon government had never any
share in public affairs, but always led a private life. Everything
worthy of notice in their works we have already spoke to. Others
were legislators, some in their own cities, others were employed in
regulating the governments of foreign states. Some of them only composed
a body of laws; others formed the constitution also, as Lycurgus; and
Solon, who did both. The Lacedaemonians have been already mentioned.
Some persons think that Solon was an excellent legislator, who could
dissolve a pure oligarchy, and save the people from that slavery which
hung over them, and establish the ancient democratic form of government
in his country; wherein every part of it was so framed as to be well
adapted to the whole. In the senate of Areopagus an oligarchy was
preserved; by the manner of electing their [1274a] magistrates, an
aristocracy; and in their courts of justice, a democracy.

Solon seems not to have altered the established form of government,
either with respect to the senate or the mode of electing their
magistrates; but to have raised the people to great consideration in the
state by allotting the supreme judicial department to them; and for this
some persons blame him, as having done what would soon overturn that
balance of power he intended to establish; for by trying all causes
whatsoever before the people, who were chosen by lot to determine them,
it was necessary to flatter a tyrannical populace who had got this
power; which contributed to bring the government to that pure democracy
it now is.

Both Ephialtes and Pericles abridged the power of the Areopagites, the
latter of whom introduced the method of paying those who attended
the courts of justice: and thus every one who aimed at being popular
proceeded increasing the power of the people to what we now see it. But
it is evident that this was not Solon's intention, but that it arose
from accident; for the people being the cause of the naval victory
over the Medes, assumed greatly upon it, and enlisted themselves
under factious demagogues, although opposed by the better part of the
citizens. He thought it indeed most necessary to entrust the people
with the choice of their magistrates and the power of calling them to
account; for without that they must have been slaves and enemies to the
other citizens: but he ordered them to elect those only who were persons
of good account and property, either out of those who were worth five
hundred medimns, or those who were called xeugitai, or those of the
third census, who were called horsemen.

As for those of the fourth, which consisted of mechanics, they were
incapable of any office. Zaleucus was the legislator of the Western
Locrians, as was Charondas, the Catanean, of his own cities, and those
also in Italy and Sicily which belonged to the Calcidians. Some persons
endeavour to prove that Onomacritus, the Locrian, was the first person
of note who drew up laws; and that he employed himself in that business
while he was at Crete, where he continued some time to learn the
prophetic art: and they say, that Thales was his companion; and that
Lycurgus and Zaleucus were the scholars of Thales, and Charondas of
Zaleucus; but those who advance this, advance what is repugnant to
chronology. Philolaus also, of the family of the Bacchiades, was a
Theban legislator. This man was very fond of Diocles, a victor in
the Olympic games, and when he left his country from a disgust at an
improper passion which his mother Alithoe had entertained for him, and
settled at Thebes, Philolaus followed him, where they both died, and
where they still show their tombs placed in view of each other, but so
disposed, that one of them looks towards Corinth, the other does not;
the reason they give for this is, that Diodes, from his detestation of
his mother's passion, would have his tomb so placed that no one could
see Corinth from it; but Philolaus chose that it might be seen from his:
and this was the cause of their living at Thebes. [1274b]

As Philolaus gave them laws concerning many other things, so did he upon
adoption, which they call adoptive laws; and this he in particular did
to preserve the number of families. Charondas did nothing new, except
in actions for perjury, which he was the first person who took into
particular consideration. He also drew up his laws with greater elegance
and accuracy than even any of our present legislators. Philolaus
introduced the law for the equal distribution of goods; Plato that for
the community of women, children, and goods, and also for public tables
for the women; and one concerning drunkenness, that they might observe
sobriety in their symposiums. He also made a law concerning their
warlike exercises; that they should acquire a habit of using both hands
alike, as it was necessary that one hand should be as useful as the
other.

As for Draco's laws, they were published when the government was already
established, and they have nothing particular in them worth mentioning,
except their severity on account of the enormity of their punishments.
Pittacus was the author of some laws, but never drew up any form of
government; one of which was this, that if a drunken man beat any person
he should be punished more than if he did it when sober; for as
people are more apt to be abusive when drunk than sober, he paid no
consideration to the excuse which drunkenness might claim, but regarded
only the common benefit. Andromadas Regmus was also a lawgiver to the
Thracian talcidians. There are some laws of his concerning murders and
heiresses extant, but these contain nothing that any one can say is new
and his own. And thus much for different sorts of governments, as well
those which really exist as those which different persons have proposed.




BOOK III




CHAPTER I


Every one who inquires into the nature of government, and what are its
different forms, should make this almost his first question, What is a
city? For upon this there is a dispute: for some persons say the city
did this or that, while others say, not the city, but the oligarchy,
or the tyranny. We see that the city is the only object which both the
politician and legislator have in view in all they do: but government
is a certain ordering of those who inhabit a city. As a city is a
collective body, and, like other wholes, composed of many parts, it is
evident our first inquiry must be, what a citizen is: for a city is a
certain number of citizens. So that we must consider whom we ought to
call citizen, and who is one; for this is often doubtful: for every one
will not allow that this character is applicable to the same person; for
that man who would be a citizen in a republic would very often not be
one in an oligarchy. We do not include in this inquiry many of those who
acquire this appellation out of the ordinary way, as honorary persons,
for instance, but those only who have a natural right to it.

Now it is not residence which constitutes a man a citizen; for in this
sojourners and slaves are upon an equality with him; nor will it be
sufficient for this purpose, that you have the privilege of the laws,
and may plead or be impleaded, for this all those of different nations,
between whom there is a mutual agreement for that purpose, are allowed;
although it very often happens, that sojourners have not a perfect right
therein without the protection of a patron, to whom they are obliged to
apply, which shows that their share in the community is incomplete. In
like manner, with respect to boys who are not yet enrolled, or old men
who are past war, we admit that they are in some respects citizens,
but not completely so, but with some exceptions, for these are not yet
arrived to years of maturity, and those are past service; nor is
there any difference between them. But what we mean is sufficiently
intelligible and clear, we want a complete citizen, one in whom there
is no deficiency to be corrected to make him so. As to those who are
banished, or infamous, there may be the same objections made and the
same answer given. There is nothing that more characterises a complete
citizen than having a share in the judicial and executive part of the
government.

With respect to offices, some are fixed to a particular time, so that
no person is, on any account, permitted to fill them twice; or else
not till some certain period has intervened; others are not fixed, as a
juryman's, and a member of the general assembly: but probably some one
may say these are not offices, nor have the citizens in these capacities
any share in the government; though surely it is ridiculous to say that
those who have the principal power in the state bear no office in it.
But this objection is of no weight, for it is only a dispute about
words; as there is no general term which can be applied both to the
office of a juryman and a member of the assembly. For the sake of
distinction, suppose we call it an indeterminate office: but I lay it
down as a maxim, that those are citizens who could exercise it. Such
then is the description of a citizen who comes nearest to what all those
who are called citizens are. Every one also should know, that of the
component parts of those things which differ from each other in species,
after the first or second remove, those which follow have either nothing
at all or very little common to each.

Now we see that governments differ from each other in their form,
and that some of them are defective, others [1275b] as excellent as
possible: for it is evident, that those which have many deficiencies
and degeneracies in them must be far inferior to those which are without
such faults. What I mean by degeneracies will be hereafter explained.
Hence it is clear that the office of a citizen must differ as
governments do from each other: for which reason he who is called
a citizen has, in a democracy, every privilege which that station
supposes. In other forms of government he may enjoy them; but not
necessarily: for in some states the people have no power; nor have they
any general assembly, but a few select men.

The trial also of different causes is allotted to different persons; as
at Lacedaemon all disputes concerning contracts are brought before some
of the ephori: the senate are the judges in cases of murder, and so on;
some being to be heard by one magistrate, others by another: and thus
at Carthage certain magistrates determine all causes. But our former
description of a citizen will admit of correction; for in some
governments the office of a juryman and a member of the general assembly
is not an indeterminate one; but there are particular persons appointed
for these purposes, some or all of the citizens being appointed jurymen
or members of the general assembly, and this either for all causes and
all public business whatsoever, or else for some particular one: and
this may be sufficient to show what a citizen is; for he who has a right
to a share in the judicial and executive part of government in any
city, him we call a citizen of that place; and a city, in one word, is
a collective body of such persons sufficient in themselves to all the
purposes of life.




CHAPTER II


In common use they define a citizen to be one who is sprung from
citizens on both sides, not on the father's or the mother's only. Others
carry the matter still further, and inquire how many of his ancestors
have been citizens, as his grandfather, great-grandfather, etc., but
some persons have questioned how the first of the family could prove
themselves citizens, according to this popular and careless definition.
Gorgias of Leontium, partly entertaining the same doubt, and partly in
jest, says, that as a mortar is made by a mortar-maker, so a citizen is
made by a citizen-maker, and a Larisssean by a Larisssean-maker. This
is indeed a very simple account of the matter; for if citizens are so,
according to this definition, it will be impossible to apply it to the
first founders or first inhabitants of states, who cannot possibly claim
in right either of their father or mother. It is probably a matter of
still more difficulty to determine their rights as citizens who are
admitted to their freedom after any revolution in the state. As, for
instance, at Athens, after the expulsion of the tyrants, when Clisthenes
enrolled many foreigners and city-slaves amongst the tribes; and the
doubt with respect to them was, not whether they were citizens or no,
but whether they were legally so or not. Though indeed some persons may
have this further [1276a] doubt, whether a citizen can be a citizen
when he is illegally made; as if an illegal citizen, and one who is
no citizen at all, were in the same predicament: but since we see some
persons govern unjustly, whom yet we admit to govern, though not justly,
and the definition of a citizen is one who exercises certain offices,
for such a one we have defined a citizen to be, it is evident, that a
citizen illegally created yet continues to be a citizen, but whether
justly or unjustly so belongs to the former inquiry.




CHAPTER III


It has also been doubted what was and what was not the act of the city;
as, for instance, when a democracy arises out of an aristocracy or a
tyranny; for some persons then refuse to fulfil their contracts; as if
the right to receive the money was in the tyrant and not in the state,
and many other things of the same nature; as if any covenant was founded
for violence and not for the common good. So in like manner, if anything
is done by those who have the management of public affairs where a
democracy is established, their actions are to be considered as the
actions of the state, as well as in the oligarchy or tyranny.

And here it seems very proper to consider this question, When shall we
say that a city is the same, and when shall we say that it is different?

It is but a superficial mode of examining into this question to begin
with the place and the people; for it may happen that these may be
divided from that, or that some one of them may live in one place, and
some in another (but this question may be regarded as no very knotty
one; for, as a city may acquire that appellation on many accounts,
it may be solved many ways); and in like manner, when men inhabit one
common place, when shall we say that they inhabit the same city, or that
the city is the same? for it does not depend upon the walls; for I can
suppose Peloponnesus itself surrounded with a wall, as Babylon was, and
every other place, which rather encircles many nations than one city,
and that they say was taken three days when some of the inhabitants
knew nothing of it: but we shall find a proper time to determine this
question; for the extent of a city, how large it should be, and whether
it should consist of more than one people, these are particulars that
the politician should by no means be unacquainted with. This, too, is a
matter of inquiry, whether we shall say that a city is the same while
it is inhabited by the same race of men, though some of them are
perpetually dying, others coming into the world, as we say that a river
or a fountain is the same, though the waters are continually changing;
or when a revolution takes place shall we [1276b] say the men are the
same, but the city is different: for if a city is a community, it is a
community of citizens; but if the mode of government should alter, and
become of another sort, it would seem a necessary consequence that the
city is not the same; as we regard the tragic chorus as different from
the comic, though it may probably consist of the same performers: thus
every other community or composition is said to be different if the
species of composition is different; as in music the same hands produce
different harmony, as the Doric and Phrygian. If this is true, it is
evident, that when we speak of a city as being the same we refer to the
government there established; and this, whether it is called by the
same name or any other, or inhabited by the same men or different.
But whether or no it is right to dissolve the community when the
constitution is altered is another question.




CHAPTER IV


What has been said, it follows that we should consider whether the
same virtues which constitute a good man make a valuable citizen, or
different; and if a particular inquiry is necessary for this matter we
must first give a general description of the virtues of a good citizen;
for as a sailor is one of those who make up a community, so is a
citizen, although the province of one sailor may be different from
another's (for one is a rower, another a steersman, a third a boatswain,
and so on, each having their several appointments), it is evident that
the most accurate description of any one good sailor must refer to
his peculiar abilities, yet there are some things in which the same
description may be applied to the whole crew, as the safety of the ship
is the common business of all of them, for this is the general centre of
all their cares: so also with respect to citizens, although they may
in a few particulars be very different, yet there is one care common to
them all, the safety of the community, for the community of the citizens
composes the state; for which reason the virtue of a citizen has
necessarily a reference to the state. But if there are different sorts
of governments, it is evident that those actions which constitute the
virtue of an excellent citizen in one community will not constitute it
in another; wherefore the virtue of such a one cannot be perfect: but we
say, a man is good when his virtues are perfect; from whence it follows,
that an excellent citizen does not possess that virtue which constitutes
a good man. Those who are any ways doubtful concerning this question
may be convinced of the truth of it by examining into the best formed
states: for, if it is impossible that a city should consist entirely of
excellent citizens (while it is necessary that every one should do well
in his calling, in which consists his excellence, as it is impossible
that all the citizens should have the same [1277a] qualifications) it
is impossible that the virtue of a citizen and a good man should be the
same; for all should possess the virtue of an excellent citizen: for
from hence necessarily arise the perfection of the city: but that every
one should possess the virtue of a good man is impossible without
all the citizens in a well-regulated state were necessarily virtuous.
Besides, as a city is composed of dissimilar parts, as an animal is of
life and body; the soul of reason and appetite; a family of a man and
his wife--property of a master and a slave; in the same manner, as a
city is composed of all these and many other very different parts, it
necessarily follows that the virtue of all the citizens cannot be the
same; as the business of him who leads the band is different from the
other dancers. From all which proofs it is evident that the virtues of
a citizen cannot be one and the same. But do we never find those virtues
united which constitute a good man and excellent citizen? for we say,
such a one is an excellent magistrate and a prudent and good man; but
prudence is a necessary qualification for all those who engage in public
affairs. Nay, some persons affirm that the education of those who are
intended to command should, from the beginning, be different from other
citizens, as the children of kings are generally instructed in riding
and warlike exercises; and thus Euripides says:

  "... No showy arts Be mine, but teach me what the state requires."

As if those who are to rule were to have an education peculiar to
themselves. But if we allow, that the virtues of a good man and a
good magistrate may be the same, and a citizen is one who obeys the
magistrate, it follows that the virtue of the one cannot in general be
the same as the virtue of the other, although it may be true of some
particular citizen; for the virtue of the magistrate must be different
from the virtue of the citizen. For which reason Jason declared that
was he deprived of his kingdom he should pine away with regret, as not
knowing how to live a private man. But it is a great recommendation to
know how to command as well as to obey; and to do both these things well
is the virtue of an accomplished citizen. If then the virtue of a good
man consists only in being able to command, but the virtue of a good
citizen renders him equally fit for the one as well as the other, the
commendation of both of them is not the same. It appears, then, that
both he who commands and he who obeys should each of them learn their
separate business: but that the citizen should be master of and
take part in both these, as any one may easily perceive; in a family
government there is no occasion for the master to know how to perform
the necessary offices, but rather to enjoy the labour of others; for to
do the other is a servile part. I mean by the other, the common family
business of the slave.

There are many sorts of slaves; for their employments are various: of
these the handicraftsmen are one, who, as their name imports, get their
living by the labour of their hands, and amongst these all mechanics are
included; [1277b] for which reasons such workmen, in some states, were
not formerly admitted into any share in the government; till at length
democracies were established: it is not therefore proper for any man
of honour, or any citizen, or any one who engages in public affairs, to
learn these servile employments without they have occasion for them for
their own use; for without this was observed the distinction between a
master and a slave would be lost. But there is a government of another
sort, in which men govern those who are their equals in rank, and
freemen, which we call a political government, in which men learn to
command by first submitting to obey, as a good general of horse, or a
commander-in-chief, must acquire a knowledge of their duty by
having been long under the command of another, and the like in every
appointment in the army: for well is it said, no one knows how to
command who has not himself been under command of another. The virtues
of those are indeed different, but a good citizen must necessarily be
endowed with them; he ought also to know in what manner freemen ought
to govern, as well as be governed: and this, too, is the duty of a good
man. And if the temperance and justice of him who commands is different
from his who, though a freeman, is under command, it is evident that the
virtues of a good citizen cannot be the same as justice, for instance
but must be of a different species in these two different situations, as
the temperance and courage of a man and a woman are different from each
other; for a man would appear a coward who had only that courage which
would be graceful in a woman, and a woman would be thought a talker who
should take as large a part in the conversation as would become a man of
consequence.

The domestic employments of each of them are also different; it is the
man's business to acquire subsistence, the woman's to take care of it.
But direction and knowledge of public affairs is a virtue peculiar to
those who govern, while all others seem to be equally requisite for both
parties; but with this the governed have no concern, it is theirs to
entertain just notions: they indeed are like flute-makers, while those
who govern are the musicians who play on them. And thus much to show
whether the virtue of a good man and an excellent citizen is the same,
or if it is different, and also how far it is the same, and how far
different.




CHAPTER V


But with respect to citizens there is a doubt remaining, whether those
only are truly so who are allowed to share in the government, or whether
the mechanics also are to be considered as such? for if those who are
not permitted to rule are to be reckoned among them, it is impossible
that the virtue of all the citizens should be the same, for these also
are citizens; and if none of them are admitted to be citizens, where
shall they be ranked? for they are neither [1278a] sojourners nor
foreigners? or shall we say that there will no inconvenience arise from
their not being citizens, as they are neither slaves nor freedmen:
for this is certainly true, that all those are not citizens who are
necessary to the existence of a city, as boys are not citizens in the
same manner that men are, for those are perfectly so, the others under
some conditions; for they are citizens, though imperfect ones: for
in former times among some people the mechanics were either slaves or
foreigners, for which reason many of them are so now: and indeed the
best regulated states will not permit a mechanic to be a citizen; but
if it be allowed them, we cannot then attribute the virtue we have
described to every citizen or freeman, but to those only who are
disengaged from servile offices. Now those who are employed by one
person in them are slaves; those who do them for money are mechanics
and hired servants: hence it is evident on the least reflection what is
their situation, for what I have said is fully explained by appearances.
Since the number of communities is very great, it follows necessarily
that there will be many different sorts of citizens, particularly
of those who are governed by others, so that in one state it may be
necessary to admit mechanics and hired servants to be citizens, but in
others it may be impossible; as particularly in an aristocracy, where
honours are bestowed on virtue and dignity: for it is impossible for
one who lives the life of a mechanic or hired servant to acquire the
practice of virtue. In an oligarchy also hired servants are not admitted
to be citizens; because there a man's right to bear any office is
regulated by his fortune; but mechanics are, for many citizens are very
rich.

There was a law at Thebes that no one could have a share in the
government till he had been ten years out of trade. In many states the
law invites strangers to accept the freedom of the city; and in some
democracies the son of a free-woman is himself free. The same is also
observed in many others with respect to natural children; but it is
through want of citizens regularly born that they admit such: for these
laws are always made in consequence of a scarcity of inhabitants; so,
as their numbers increase, they first deprive the children of a male or
female slave of this privilege, next the child of a free-woman, and last
of all they will admit none but those whose fathers and mothers were
both free.

That there are many sorts of citizens, and that he may be said to be as
completely who shares the honours of the state, is evident from what
has been already said. Thus Achilles, in Homer, complains of Agamemnon's
treating him like an unhonoured stranger; for a stranger or sojourner is
one who does not partake of the honours of the state: and whenever the
right to the freedom of the city is kept obscure, it is for the sake of
the inhabitants. [1278b] From what has been said it is plain whether the
virtue of a good man and an excellent citizen is the same or different:
and we find that in some states it is the same, in others not; and also
that this is not true of each citizen, but of those only who take the
lead, or are capable of taking the lead, in public affairs, either alone
or in conjunction with others.




CHAPTER VI


Having established these points, we proceed next to consider whether one
form of government only should be established, or more than one; and if
more, how many, and of what sort, and what are the differences between
them. The form of government is the ordering and regulating of the city,
and all the offices in it, particularly those wherein the supreme power
is lodged; and this power is always possessed by the administration; but
the administration itself is that particular form of government which
is established in any state: thus in a democracy the supreme power is
lodged in the whole people; on the contrary, in an oligarchy it is in
the hands of a few. We say then, that the form of government in these
states is different, and we shall find the same thing hold good in
others. Let us first determine for whose sake a city is established;
and point out the different species of rule which man may submit to in
social life.

I have already mentioned in my treatise on the management of a family,
and the power of the master, that man is an animal naturally formed
for society, and that therefore, when he does not want any foreign
assistance, he will of his own accord desire to live with others; not
but that mutual advantage induces them to it, as far as it enables each
person to live more agreeably; and this is indeed the great object
not only to all in general, but also to each individual: but it is not
merely matter of choice, but they join in society also, even that they
may be able to live, which probably is not without some share of merit,
and they also support civil society, even for the sake of preserving
life, without they are grievously overwhelmed with the miseries of it:
for it is very evident that men will endure many calamities for the sake
of living, as being something naturally sweet and desirable. It is easy
to point out the different modes of government, and we have already
settled them in our exoteric discourses. The power of the master, though
by nature equally serviceable, both to the master and to the slave, yet
nevertheless has for its object the benefit of the master, while the
benefit of the slave arises accidentally; for if the slave is destroyed,
the power of the master is at an end: but the authority which a man
has over his wife, and children, and his family, which we call domestic
government, is either for the benefit of those who are under subjection,
or else for the common benefit of the whole: but its particular object
is the benefit of the governed, as we see in other arts; in physic, for
instance, and the gymnastic exercises, wherein, if any benefit [1279a]
arise to the master, it is accidental; for nothing forbids the master of
the exercises from sometimes being himself one of those who exercises,
as the steersman is always one of the sailors; but both the master of
the exercises and the steersman consider the good of those who are under
their government. Whatever good may happen to the steersman when he is
a sailor, or to the master of the exercises when he himself makes one at
the games, is not intentional, or the object of their power; thus in all
political governments which are established to preserve and defend the
equality of the citizens it is held right to rule by turns. Formerly, as
was natural, every one expected that each of his fellow-citizens should
in his turn serve the public, and thus administer to his private good,
as he himself when in office had done for others; but now every one is
desirous of being continually in power, that he may enjoy the advantage
which he makes of public business and being in office; as if places were
a never-failing remedy for every complaint, and were on that account so
eagerly sought after.

It is evident, then, that all those governments which have a common good
in view are rightly established and strictly just, but those who have
in view only the good of the rulers are all founded on wrong principles,
and are widely different from what a government ought to be, for they
are tyranny over slaves, whereas a city is a community of freemen.




CHAPTER VII


Having established these particulars, we come to consider next the
different number of governments which there are, and what they are; and
first, what are their excellencies: for when we have determined this,
their defects will be evident enough.

It is evident that every form of government or administration, for the
words are of the same import, must contain a supreme power over the
whole state, and this supreme power must necessarily be in the hands
of one person, or a few, or many; and when either of these apply their
power for the common good, such states are well governed; but when the
interest of the one, the few, or the many who enjoy this power is alone
consulted, then ill; for you must either affirm that those who make
up the community are not citizens, or else let these share in the
advantages of government. We usually call a state which is governed by
one person for the common good, a kingdom; one that is governed by
more than one, but by a few only, an aristocracy; either because the
government is in the hands of the most worthy citizens, or because it
is the best form for the city and its inhabitants. When the citizens at
large govern for the public good, it is called a state; which is also
a common name for all other governments, and these distinctions are
consonant to reason; for it will not be difficult to find one person,
or a very few, of very distinguished abilities, but almost impossible to
meet with the majority [1279b] of a people eminent for every virtue;
but if there is one common to a whole nation it is valour; for this is
created and supported by numbers: for which reason in such a state
the profession of arms will always have the greatest share in the
government.

Now the corruptions attending each of these governments are these; a
kingdom may degenerate into a tyranny, an aristocracy into an oligarchy,
and a state into a democracy. Now a tyranny is a monarchy where the good
of one man only is the object of government, an oligarchy considers
only the rich, and a democracy only the poor; but neither of them have a
common good in view.




CHAPTER VIII


It will be necessary to enlarge a little more upon the nature of each
of these states, which is not without some difficulty, for he who would
enter into a philosophical inquiry into the principles of them, and not
content himself with a superficial view of their outward conduct, must
pass over and omit nothing, but explain the true spirit of each of them.
A tyranny then is, as has been said, a monarchy, where one person has
an absolute and despotic power over the whole community and every member
therein: an oligarchy, where the supreme power of the state is lodged
with the rich: a democracy, on the contrary, is where those have it who
are worth little or nothing. But the first difficulty that arises from
the distinctions which we have laid down is this, should it happen that
the majority of the inhabitants who possess the power of the state (for
this is a democracy) should be rich, the question is, how does this
agree with what we have said? The same difficulty occurs, should it ever
happen that the poor compose a smaller part of the people than the rich,
but from their superior abilities acquire the supreme power; for this is
what they call an oligarchy; it should seem then that our definition
of the different states was not correct: nay, moreover, could any one
suppose that the majority of the people were poor, and the minority
rich, and then describe the state in this manner, that an oligarchy
was a government in which the rich, being few in number, possessed the
supreme power, and that a democracy was a state in which the poor, being
many in number, possessed it, still there will be another difficulty;
for what name shall we give to those states we have been describing? I
mean, that in which the greater number are rich, and that in which the
lesser number are poor (where each of these possess the supreme power),
if there are no other states than those we have described. It seems
therefore evident to reason, that whether the supreme power is vested
in the hands of many or few may be a matter of accident; but that it
is clear enough, that when it is in the hands of the few, it will be
a government of the rich; when in the hands of the many, it will be a
government of the poor; since in all countries there are many poor and
few rich: it is not therefore the cause that has been already assigned
(namely, the number of people in power) that makes the difference
between the two governments; but an oligarchy and democracy differ in
this from each other, in the poverty of those who govern in the one,
and the riches I28oa of those who govern in the other; for when the
government is in the hands of the rich, be they few or be they more, it
is an oligarchy; when it is in the hands of the poor, it is a democracy:
but, as we have already said, the one will be always few, the other
numerous, but both will enjoy liberty; and from the claims of wealth and
liberty will arise continual disputes with each other for the lead in
public affairs.




CHAPTER IX


Let us first determine what are the proper limits of an oligarchy and
a democracy, and what is just in each of these states; for all men have
some natural inclination to justice; but they proceed therein only to
a certain degree; nor can they universally point out what is absolutely
just; as, for instance, what is equal appears just, and is so; but not
to all; only among those who are equals: and what is unequal appears
just, and is so; but not to all, only amongst those who are unequals;
which circumstance some people neglect, and therefore judge ill; the
reason for which is, they judge for themselves, and every one almost is
the worst judge in his own cause. Since then justice has reference to
persons, the same distinctions must be made with respect to persons
which are made with respect to things, in the manner that I have already
described in my Ethics.

As to the equality of the things, these they agree in; but their dispute
is concerning the equality of the persons, and chiefly for the reason
above assigned; because they judge ill in their own cause; and also
because each party thinks, that if they admit what is right in some
particulars, they have done justice on the whole: thus, for instance,
if some persons are unequal in riches, they suppose them unequal in the
whole; or, on the contrary, if they are equal in liberty, they suppose
them equal in the whole: but what is absolutely just they omit; for
if civil society was founded for the sake of preserving and increasing
property, every one's right in the city would be equal to his fortune;
and then the reasoning of those who insist upon an oligarchy would be
valid; for it would not be right that he who contributed one mina should
have an equal share in the hundred along with him who brought in all the
rest, either of the original money or what was afterwards acquired.

Nor was civil society founded merely to preserve the lives of its
members; but that they might live well: for otherwise a state might
be composed of slaves, or the animal creation: but this is not so; for
these have no share in the happiness of it; nor do they live after their
own choice; nor is it an alliance mutually to defend each other from
injuries, or for a commercial intercourse: for then the Tyrrhenians and
Carthaginians, and all other nations between whom treaties of commerce
subsist, would be citizens of one city; for they have articles
to regulate their exports and imports, and engagements for mutual
protection, and alliances for mutual defence; but [1280b] yet they
have not all the same magistrates established among them, but they are
different among the different people; nor does the one take any care,
that the morals of the other should be as they ought, or that none of
those who have entered into the common agreements should be unjust, or
in any degree vicious, only that they do not injure any member of the
confederacy. But whosoever endeavours to establish wholesome laws in
a state, attends to the virtues and the vices of each individual who
composes it; from whence it is evident, that the first care of him who
would found a city, truly deserving that name, and not nominally so,
must be to have his citizens virtuous; for otherwise it is merely an
alliance for self-defence; differing from those of the same cast which
are made between different people only in place: for law is an agreement
and a pledge, as the sophist Lycophron says, between the citizens of
their intending to do justice to each other, though not sufficient to
make all the citizens just and good: and that this is fact is evident,
for could any one bring different places together, as, for instance,
enclose Megara and Corinth in a wall, yet they would not be one city,
not even if the inhabitants intermarried with each other, though this
inter-community contributes much to make a place one city. Besides,
could we suppose a set of people to live separate from each other, but
within such a distance as would admit of an intercourse, and that there
were laws subsisting between each party, to prevent their injuring one
another in their mutual dealings, supposing one a carpenter, another
a husbandman, shoemaker, and the like, and that their numbers were ten
thousand, still all that they would have together in common would be a
tariff for trade, or an alliance for mutual defence, but not the same
city. And why? not because their mutual intercourse is not near enough,
for even if persons so situated should come to one place, and every one
should live in his own house as in his native city, and there should be
alliances subsisting between each party to mutually assist and prevent
any injury being done to the other, still they would not be admitted
to be a city by those who think correctly, if they preserved the same
customs when they were together as when they were separate.

It is evident, then, that a city is not a community of place; nor
established for the sake of mutual safety or traffic with each other;
but that these things are the necessary consequences of a city, although
they may all exist where there is no city: but a city is a society of
people joining together with their families and their children to live
agreeably for the sake of having their lives as happy and as independent
as possible: and for this purpose it is necessary that they should live
in one place and intermarry with each other: hence in all cities there
are family-meetings, clubs, sacrifices, and public entertainments to
promote friendship; for a love of sociability is friendship itself;
so that the end then for which a city is established is, that the
inhabitants of it may live happy, and these things are conducive to that
end: for it is a community of families and villages for the sake of a
perfect independent life; that is, as we have already said, for the sake
of living well and happily. It is not therefore founded for the purpose
of men's merely [1281a] living together, but for their living as men
ought; for which reason those who contribute most to this end deserve to
have greater power in the city than those who are their equals in family
and freedom, but their inferiors in civil virtue, or those who excel
them in wealth but are below them in worth. It is evident from what
has been said, that in all disputes upon government each party says
something that is just.




CHAPTER X


It may also be a doubt where the supreme power ought to be lodged.
Shall it be with the majority, or the wealthy, with a number of proper
persons, or one better than the rest, or with a tyrant? But whichever
of these we prefer some difficulty will arise. For what? shall the
poor have it because they are the majority? they may then divide among
themselves, what belongs to the rich: nor is this unjust; because truly
it has been so judged by the supreme power. But what avails it to point
out what is the height of injustice if this is not? Again, if the many
seize into their own hands everything which belongs to the few, it is
evident that the city will be at an end. But virtue will never destroy
what is virtuous; nor can what is right be the ruin of the state:
therefore such a law can never be right, nor can the acts of a tyrant
ever be wrong, for of necessity they must all be just; for he, from his
unlimited power, compels every one to obey his command, as the multitude
oppress the rich. Is it right then that the rich, the few, should have
the supreme power? and what if they be guilty of the same rapine and
plunder the possessions of the majority, that will be as right as the
other: but that all things of this sort are wrong and unjust is evident.
Well then, these of the better sort shall have it: but must not then all
the other citizens live unhonoured, without sharing the offices of the
city; for the offices of a city are its honours, and if one set of men
are always in power, it is evident that the rest must be without honour.
Well then, let it be with one person of all others the fittest for it:
but by this means the power will be still more contracted, and a greater
number than before continue unhonoured. But some one may say, that it is
wrong to let man have the supreme power and not the law, as his soul is
subject to so many passions. But if this law appoints an aristocracy, or
a democracy, how will it help us in our present doubts? for those things
will happen which we have already mentioned.




CHAPTER XI


Other particulars we will consider separately; but it seems proper to
prove, that the supreme power ought to be lodged with the many, rather
than with those of the better sort, who are few; and also to explain
what doubts (and probably just ones) may arise: now, though not one
individual of the many may himself be fit for the supreme power, yet
when these many are joined together, it does not follow but they may be
better qualified for it than those; and this not separately, but as a
collective body; as the public suppers exceed those which are given at
one person's private expense: for, as they are many, each person brings
in his share of virtue and wisdom; and thus, coming together, they are
like one man made up of a multitude, with many feet, many hands,
and many intelligences: thus is it with respect to the manners and
understandings of the multitude taken together; for which reason the
public are the best judges of music and poetry; for some understand
one part, some another, and all collectively the whole; and in this
particular men of consequence differ from each of the many; as they
say those who are beautiful do from those who are not so, and as fine
pictures excel any natural objects, by collecting the several beautiful
parts which were dispersed among different originals into one, although
the separate parts, as the eye or any other, might be handsomer than in
the picture.

But if this distinction is to be made between every people and every
general assembly, and some few men of consequence, it may be doubtful
whether it is true; nay, it is clear enough that, with respect to a few,
it is not; since the same conclusion might be applied even to brutes:
and indeed wherein do some men differ from brutes? Not but that nothing
prevents what I have said being true of the people in some states. The
doubt then which we have lately proposed, with all its consequences, may
be settled in this manner; it is necessary that the freemen who compose
the bulk of the people should have absolute power in some things; but as
they are neither men of property, nor act uniformly upon principles
of virtue, it is not safe to trust them with the first offices in the
state, both on account of their iniquity and their ignorance; from
the one of which they will do what is wrong, from the other they will
mistake: and yet it is dangerous to allow them no power or share in the
government; for when there are many poor people who are incapable of
acquiring the honours of their country, the state must necessarily have
many enemies in it; let them then be permitted to vote in the public
assemblies and to determine causes; for which reason Socrates, and some
other legislators, gave them the power of electing the officers of the
state, and also of inquiring into their conduct when they came out of
office, and only prevented their being magistrates by themselves;
for the multitude when they are collected together have all of them
sufficient understanding for these purposes, and, mixing among those of
higher rank, are serviceable to the city, as some things, which alone
are improper for food, when mixed with others make the whole more
wholesome than a few of them would be.

But there is a difficulty attending this form of government, for it
seems, that the person who himself was capable of curing any one who
was then sick, must be the best judge whom to employ as a physician; but
such a one must be himself a physician; and the same holds true in every
other practice and art: and as a physician ought [1282a] to give an
account of his practice to a physician, so ought it to be in other arts:
those whose business is physic may be divided into three sorts, the
first of these is he who makes up the medicines; the second prescribes,
and is to the other as the architect is to the mason; the third is he
who understands the science, but never practises it: now these three
distinctions may be found in those who understand all other arts; nor
have we less opinion of their judgment who are only instructed in the
principles of the art than of those who practise it: and with respect
to elections the same method of proceeding seems right; for to elect a
proper person in any science is the business of those who are skilful
therein; as in geometry, of geometricians; in steering, of steersmen:
but if some individuals should know something of particular arts and
works, they do not know more than the professors of them: so that even
upon this principle neither the election of magistrates, nor the censure
of their conduct, should be entrusted to the many.

But probably all that has been here said may not be right; for, to
resume the argument I lately used, if the people are not very brutal
indeed, although we allow that each individual knows less of these
affairs than those who have given particular attention to them, yet when
they come together they will know them better, or at least not worse;
besides, in some particular arts it is not the workman only who is the
best judge; namely, in those the works of which are understood by those
who do not profess them: thus he who builds a house is not the only
judge of it, for the master of the family who inhabits it is a better;
thus also a steersman is a better judge of a tiller than he who made
it; and he who gives an entertainment than the cook. What has been said
seems a sufficient solution of this difficulty; but there is another
that follows: for it seems absurd that the power of the state should be
lodged with those who are but of indifferent morals, instead of those
who are of excellent characters. Now the power of election and censure
are of the utmost consequence, and this, as has been said, in some
states they entrust to the people; for the general assembly is the
supreme court of all, and they have a voice in this, and deliberate in
all public affairs, and try all causes, without any objection to the
meanness of their circumstances, and at any age: but their treasurers,
generals, and other great officers of state are taken from men of great
fortune and worth. This difficulty also may be solved upon the same
principle; and here too they may be right, for the power is not in the
man who is member of the assembly, or council, but the assembly itself,
and the council, and the people, of which each individual of the whole
community are the parts, I mean as senator, adviser, or judge; for which
reason it is very right, that the many should have the greatest powers
in their own hands; for the people, the council, and the judges are
composed of them, and the property of all these collectively is more
than the property of any person or a few who fill the great offices of
the state: and thus I determine these points.

The first question that we stated shows plainly, that the supreme
power should be lodged in laws duly made and that the magistrate or
magistrates, either one or more, should be authorised to determine those
cases which the laws cannot particularly speak to, as it is impossible
for them, in general language, to explain themselves upon everything
that may arise: but what these laws are which are established upon the
best foundations has not been yet explained, but still remains a matter
of some question: but the laws of every state will necessarily be like
every state, either trifling or excellent, just or unjust; for it is
evident, that the laws must be framed correspondent to the constitution
of the government; and, if so, it is plain, that a well-formed
government will have good laws, a bad one, bad ones.




CHAPTER XII


Since in every art and science the end aimed at is always good, so
particularly in this, which is the most excellent of all, the founding
of civil society, the good wherein aimed at is justice; for it is this
which is for the benefit of all. Now, it is the common opinion, that
justice is a certain equality; and in this point all the philosophers
are agreed when they treat of morals: for they say what is just, and to
whom; and that equals ought to receive equal: but we should know how
we are to determine what things are equal and what unequal; and in
this there is some difficulty, which calls for the philosophy of the
politician. Some persons will probably say, that the employments of the
state ought to be given according to every particular excellence of each
citizen, if there is no other difference between them and the rest of
the community, but they are in every respect else alike: for justice
attributes different things to persons differing from each other in
their character, according to their respective merits. But if this is
admitted to be true, complexion, or height, or any such advantage will
be a claim for a greater share of the public rights. But that this is
evidently absurd is clear from other arts and sciences; for with respect
to musicians who play on the flute together, the best flute is not given
to him who is of the best family, for he will play never the better for
that, but the best instrument ought to be given to him who is the best
artist.

If what is now said does not make this clear, we will explain it still
further: if there should be any one, a very excellent player on the
flute, but very deficient in family and beauty, though each of them are
more valuable endowments than a skill in music, and excel this art in a
higher degree than that player excels others, yet the best flutes ought
to be given to him; for the superiority [1283a] in beauty and fortune
should have a reference to the business in hand; but these have none.
Moreover, according to this reasoning, every possible excellence might
come in comparison with every other; for if bodily strength might
dispute the point with riches or liberty, even any bodily strength might
do it; so that if one person excelled in size more than another did in
virtue, and his size was to qualify him to take place of the other's
virtue, everything must then admit of a comparison with each other; for
if such a size is greater than virtue by so much, it is evident another
must be equal to it: but, since this is impossible, it is plain that it
would be contrary to common sense to dispute a right to any office in
the state from every superiority whatsoever: for if one person is slow
and the other swift, neither is the one better qualified nor the other
worse on that account, though in the gymnastic races a difference in
these particulars would gain the prize; but a pretension to the offices
of the state should be founded on a superiority in those qualifications
which are useful to it: for which reason those of family, independency,
and fortune, with great propriety, contend with each other for them; for
these are the fit persons to fill them: for a city can no more consist
of all poor men than it can of all slaves But if such persons are
requisite, it is evident that those also who are just and valiant are
equally so; for without justice and valour no state can be supported,
the former being necessary for its existence, the latter for its
happiness.




CHAPTER XIII


It seems, then, requisite for the establishment of a state, that all, or
at least many of these particulars should be well canvassed and inquired
into; and that virtue and education may most justly claim the right of
being considered as the necessary means of making the citizens happy, as
we have already said. As those who are equal in one particular are not
therefore equal in all, and those who are unequal in one particular
are not therefore unequal in all, it follows that all those governments
which are established upon a principle which supposes they are, are
erroneous.

We have already said, that all the members of the community will dispute
with each other for the offices of the state; and in some particulars
justly, but not so in general; the rich, for instance, because they
have the greatest landed property, and the ultimate right to the soil is
vested in the community; and also because their fidelity is in general
most to be depended on. The freemen and men of family will dispute the
point with each other, as nearly on an equality; for these latter have
a right to a higher regard as citizens than obscure persons, for
honourable descent is everywhere of great esteem: nor is it an improper
conclusion, that the descendants of men of worth will be men of worth
themselves; for noble birth is the fountain of virtue to men of family:
for the same reason also we justly say, that virtue has a right to put
in her pretensions. Justice, for instance, is a virtue, and so necessary
to society, that all others must yield her the precedence.

Let us now see what the many have to urge on their side against the few;
and they may say, that if, when collectively taken, they are compared
with them, they are stronger, richer, and better than they are. But
should it ever happen that all these should inhabit the [1283b] same
city, I mean the good, the rich, the noble, as well as the many, such as
usually make up the community, I ask, will there then be any reason to
dispute concerning who shall govern, or will there not? for in every
community which we have mentioned there is no dispute where the supreme
power should be placed; for as these differ from each other, so do those
in whom that is placed; for in one state the rich enjoy it, in others
the meritorious, and thus each according to their separate manners. Let
us however consider what is to be done when all these happen at the same
time to inhabit the same city. If the virtuous should be very few in
number, how then shall we act? shall we prefer the virtuous on account
of their abilities, if they are capable of governing the city? or should
they be so many as almost entirely to compose the state?

There is also a doubt concerning the pretensions of all those who claim
the honours of government: for those who found them either on fortune or
family have nothing which they can justly say in their defence; since
it is evident upon their principle, that if any one person can be found
richer than all the rest, the right of governing all these will be
justly vested in this one person. In the same manner, one man who is
of the best family will claim it from those who dispute the point upon
family merit: and probably in an aristocracy the same dispute might
arise on the score of virtue, if there is one man better than all the
other men of worth who are in the same community; it seems just, by the
same reasoning, that he should enjoy the supreme power. And upon this
principle also, while the many suppose they ought to have the supreme
command, as being more powerful than the few, if one or more than one,
though a small number should be found stronger than themselves, these
ought rather to have it than they.

All these things seem to make it plain, that none of these principles
are justly founded on which these persons would establish their right to
the supreme power; and that all men whatsoever ought to obey them:
for with respect to those who claim it as due to their virtue or their
fortune, they might have justly some objection to make; for nothing
hinders but that it may sometimes happen, that the many may be better
or richer than the few, not as individuals, but in their collective
capacity.

As to the doubt which some persons have proposed and objected, we may
answer it in this manner; it is this, whether a legislator, who would
establish the most perfect system of laws, should calculate them for
the use of the better part of the citizens, or the many, in the
circumstances we have already mentioned? The rectitude of anything
consists in its equality; that therefore which is equally right will be
advantageous to the whole state, and to every member of it in common.

Now, in general, a citizen is one who both shares in the government and
also in his turn submits to be governed; [1284a] their condition, it is
true, is different in different states: the best is that in which a man
is enabled to choose and to persevere in a course of virtue during his
whole life, both in his public and private state. But should there be
one person, or a very few, eminent for an uncommon degree of virtue,
though not enough to make up a civil state, so that the virtue of the
many, or their political abilities, should be too inferior to come in
comparison with theirs, if more than one; or if but one, with his only;
such are not to be considered as part of the city; for it would be doing
them injustice to rate them on a level with those who are so far their
inferiors in virtue and political abilities, that they appear to them
like a god amongst men. From whence it is evident, that a system of laws
must be calculated for those who are equal to each other in nature and
power. Such men, therefore, are not the object of law; for they are
themselves a law: and it would be ridiculous in any one to endeavour to
include them in the penalties of a law: for probably they might say what
Antisthenes tells us the lions did to the hares when they demanded to
be admitted to an equal share with them in the government. And it is on
this account that democratic states have established the ostracism; for
an equality seems the principal object of their government. For which
reason they compel all those who are very eminent for their power, their
fortune, their friendships, or any other cause which may give them too
great weight in the government, to submit to the ostracism, and leave
the city for a stated time; as the fabulous histories relate the
Argonauts served Hercules, for they refused to take him with them in the
ship Argo on account of his superior valour. For which reason those who
hate a tyranny and find fault with the advice which Periander gave to
Thrasybulus, must not think there was nothing to be said in its defence;
for the story goes, that Periander said nothing to the messenger in
answer to the business he was consulted about, but striking off those
ears of corn which were higher than the rest, reduced the whole crop to
a level; so that the messenger, without knowing the cause of what was
done, related the fact to Thrasybulus, who understood by it that he must
take off all the principal men in the city. Nor is this serviceable to
tyrants only; nor is it tyrants only who do it; for the same thing is
practised both in oligarchies and democracies: for the ostracism has in
a manner nearly the same power, by restraining and banishing those who
are too great; and what is done in one city is done also by those who
have the supreme power in separate states; as the Athenians with respect
to the Samians, the Chians, and the Lesbians; for when they suddenly
acquired the superiority over all Greece, they brought the other states
into subjection, contrary to the treaties which subsisted between them.
The King of Persia also very often reduces the Medes and Babylonians
when they assume upon their former power: [1284b] and this is a
principle which all governments whatsoever keep in their eye; even those
which are best administered, as well as those which are not, do it;
these for the sake of private utility, the others for the public good.

The same thing is to be perceived in the other arts and sciences; for
a painter would not represent an animal with a foot disproportionally
large, though he had drawn it remarkably beautiful; nor would the
shipwright make the prow or any other part of the vessel larger than it
ought to be; nor will the master of the band permit any who sings
louder and better than the rest to sing in concert with them. There is
therefore no reason that a monarch should not act in agreement with
free states, to support his own power, if they do the same thing for the
benefit of their respective communities; upon which account when there
is any acknowledged difference in the power of the citizens, the reason
upon which the ostracism is founded will be politically just; but it is
better for the legislator so to establish his state at the beginning as
not to want this remedy: but if in course of time such an inconvenience
should arise, to endeavour to amend it by some such correction. Not that
this was the use it was put to: for many did not regard the benefit of
their respective communities, but made the ostracism a weapon in the
hand of sedition.

It is evident, then, that in corrupt governments it is partly just and
useful to the individual, though probably it is as clear that it is not
entirely just: for in a well-governed state there may be great doubts
about the use of it, not on account of the pre-eminence which one may
have in strength, riches, or connection: but when the pre-eminence is
virtue, what then is to be done? for it seems not right to turn out and
banish such a one; neither does it seem right to govern him, for that
would be like desiring to share the power with Jupiter and to govern
him: nothing then remains but what indeed seems natural, and that is for
all persons quietly to submit to the government of those who are thus
eminently virtuous, and let them be perpetually kings in the separate
states.




CHAPTER XIV


What has been now said, it seems proper to change our subject and to
inquire into the nature of monarchies; for we have already admitted them
to be one of those species of government which are properly founded. And
here let us consider whether a kingly government is proper for a city or
a country whose principal object is the happiness of the inhabitants,
or rather some other. But let us first determine whether this is of one
kind only, or more; [1285a] and it is easy to know that it consists of
many different species, and that the forms of government are not the
same in all: for at Sparta the kingly power seems chiefly regulated by
the laws; for it is not supreme in all circumstances; but when the king
quits the territories of the state he is their general in war; and all
religious affairs are entrusted to him: indeed the kingly power with
them is chiefly that of a general who cannot be called to an account for
his conduct, and whose command is for life: for he has not the power
of life and death, except as a general; as they frequently had in
their expeditions by martial law, which we learn from Homer; for when
Agamemnon is affronted in council, he restrains his resentment, but when
he is in the field and armed with this power, he tells the Greeks:

  "Whoe'er I know shall shun th' impending fight,
   To dogs and vultures soon shall be a prey; For death is mine...."

This, then, is one species of monarchical government in which the kingly
power is in a general for life; and is sometimes hereditary, sometimes
elective: besides, there is also another, which is to be met with among
some of the barbarians, in which the kings are invested with powers
nearly equal to a tyranny, yet are, in some respects, bound by the laws
and the customs of their country; for as the barbarians are by nature
more prone to slavery than the Greeks, and those in Asia more than those
in Europe, they endure without murmuring a despotic government; for
this reason their governments are tyrannies; but yet not liable to be
overthrown, as being customary and according to law. Their guards also
are such as are used in a kingly government, not a despotic one; for the
guards of their kings are his citizens, but a tyrant's are foreigners.
The one commands, in the manner the law directs, those who willingly
obey; the other, arbitrarily, those who consent not. The one, therefore,
is guarded by the citizens, the other against them.

These, then, are the two different sorts of these monarchies, and
another is that which in ancient Greece they called _aesumnetes_; which
is nothing more than an elective tyranny; and its difference from that
which is to be found amongst the barbarians consists not in its not
being according to law, but only in its not being according to the
ancient customs of the country. Some persons possessed this power for
life, others only for a particular time or particular purpose, as the
people of Mitylene elected Pittacus to oppose the exiles, who were
headed by Antimenides and Alcaeus the poet, as we learn from a poem
of his; for he upbraids the Mitylenians for having chosen Pittacus for
their tyrant, and with one [1285b] voice extolling him to the skies who
was the ruin of a rash and devoted people. These sorts of government
then are, and ever were, despotic, on account of their being tyrannies;
but inasmuch as they are elective, and over a free people, they are also
kingly.

A fourth species of kingly government is that which was in use in the
heroic times, when a free people submitted to a kingly government,
according to the laws and customs of their country. For those who were
at first of benefit to mankind, either in arts or arms, or by collecting
them into civil society, or procuring them an establishment, became the
kings of a willing people, and established an hereditary monarchy.
They were particularly their generals in war, and presided over their
sacrifices, excepting such only as belonged to the priests: they were
also the supreme judges over the people; and in this case some of them
took an oath, others did not; they did, the form of swearing was by
their sceptre held out.

In ancient times the power of the kings extended to everything
whatsoever, both civil, domestic, and foreign; but in after-times they
relinquished some of their privileges, and others the people assumed, so
that, in some states, they left their kings only the right of presiding
over the sacrifices; and even those whom it were worth while to call
by that name had only the right of being commander-in-chief in their
foreign wars.

These, then, are the four sorts of kingdoms: the first is that of the
heroic times; which was a government over a free people, with its rights
in some particulars marked out; for the king was their general, their
judge, and their high priest. The second, that of the barbarians; which
is an hereditary despotic government regulated by laws: the third is
that which they call aesumnetic, which is an elective tyranny. The
fourth is the Lacedaemonian; and this, in few words, is nothing more
than an hereditary generalship: and in these particulars they differ
from each other. There is a fifth species of kingly government, which is
when one person has a supreme power over all things whatsoever, in
the manner that every state and every city has over those things which
belong to the public: for as the master of a family is king in his own
house, so such a king is master of a family in his own city or state.




CHAPTER XV


But the different sorts of kingly governments may, if I may so say,
be reduced to two; which we will consider more particularly. The last
spoken of, and the Lacedaemonian, for the chief of the others are placed
between these, which are as it were at the extremities, they having less
power than an absolute government, and yet more than the Lacedaemonians;
so that the whole matter in question may be reduced to these two points;
the one is, whether it is advantageous to the citizens to have the
office of general continue in one person for life, and whether it should
be confined to any particular families or whether every one should be
eligible: the other, whether [1286a] it is advantageous for one person
to have the supreme power over everything or not. But to enter into the
particulars concerning the office of a Lacedaemonian general would be
rather to frame laws for a state than to consider the nature and utility
of its constitution, since we know that the appointing of a general is
what is done in every state. Passing over this question then, we will
proceed to consider the other part of their government, which is
the polity of the state; and this it will be necessary to examine
particularly into, and to go through such questions as may arise.

Now the first thing which presents itself to our consideration is this,
whether it is best to be governed by a good man, or by good laws? Those
who prefer a kingly government think that laws can only speak a general
language, but cannot adapt themselves to particular circumstances; for
which reason it is absurd in any science to follow written rule; and
even in Egypt the physician was allowed to alter the mode of cure which
the law prescribed to him, after the fourth day; but if he did it sooner
it was at his own peril: from whence it is evident, on the very same
account, that a government of written laws is not the best; and yet
general reasoning is necessary to all those who are to govern, and it
will be much more perfect in those who are entirely free from passions
than in those to whom they are natural. But now this is a quality which
laws possess; while the other is natural to the human soul. But some
one will say in answer to this, that man will be a better judge of
particulars. It will be necessary, then, for a king to be a lawgiver,
and that his laws should be published, but that those should have no
authority which are absurd, as those which are not, should. But whether
is it better for the community that those things which cannot possibly
come under the cognisance of the law either at all or properly should be
under the government of every worthy citizen, as the present method is,
when the public community, in their general assemblies, act as judges
and counsellors, where all their determinations are upon particular
cases, for one individual, be he who he will, will be found, upon
comparison, inferior to a whole people taken collectively: but this
is what a city is, as a public entertainment is better than one man's
portion: for this reason the multitude judge of many things better than
any one single person. They are also less liable to corruption from
their numbers, as water is from its quantity: besides, the judgment of
an individual must necessarily be perverted if he is overcome by anger
or any other passion; but it would be hard indeed if the whole community
should be misled by anger. Moreover, let the people be free, and they
will do nothing but in conformity to the law, except only in those cases
which the law cannot speak to. But though what I am going to propose may
not easily be met with, yet if the majority of the state should happen
to be good men, should they prefer one uncorrupt governor or many
equally good, is it not evident that they should choose the many? But
there may be divisions among [1286b] these which cannot happen when
there is but one. In answer to this it may be replied that all their
souls will be as much animated with virtue as this one man's.

If then a government of many, and all of them good men, compose an
aristocracy, and the government of one a kingly power, it is evident
that the people should rather choose the first than the last; and this
whether the state is powerful or not, if many such persons so alike
can be met with: and for this reason probable it was, that the first
governments were generally monarchies; because it was difficult to find
a number of persons eminently virtuous, more particularly as the world
was then divided into small communities; besides, kings were appointed
in return for the benefits they had conferred on mankind; but such
actions are peculiar to good men: but when many persons equal in virtue
appeared at the time, they brooked not a superiority, but sought after
an equality and established a free state; but after this, when they
degenerated, they made a property of the public; which probably gave
rise to oligarchies; for they made wealth meritorious, and the honours
of government were reserved for the rich: and these afterwards turned
to tyrannies and these in their turn gave rise to democracies; for
the power of the tyrants continually decreasing, on account of their
rapacious avarice, the people grew powerful enough to frame and
establish democracies: and as cities after that happened to increase,
probably it was not easy for them to be under any other government than
a democracy. But if any person prefers a kingly government in a state,
what is to be done with the king's children? Is the family also to
reign? But should they have such children as some persons usually have,
it will be very detrimental. It may be said, that then the king who
has it in his power will never permit such children to succeed to his
kingdom. But it is not easy to trust to that; for it is very hard and
requires greater virtue than is to be met with in human nature. There is
also a doubt concerning the power with which a king should be entrusted:
whether he should be allowed force sufficient to compel those who do
not choose to be obedient to the laws, and how he is to support his
government? for if he is to govern according to law and do nothing of
his own will which is contrary thereunto, at the same time it will
be necessary to protect that power with which he guards the law, This
matter however may not be very difficult to determine; for he ought to
have a proper power, and such a one is that which will be sufficient
to make the king superior to any one person or even a large part of the
community, but inferior to the whole, as the ancients always appointed
guards for that person whom they created aesumnetes or tyrant; and some
one advised the Syracusians, when Dionysius asked for guards, to allow
him such.




CHAPTER XVI


[1287a] We will next consider the absolute monarch that we have just
mentioned, who does everything according to his own will: for a king
governing under the direction of laws which he is obliged to follow does
not of himself create any particular species of government, as we have
already said: for in every state whatsoever, either aristocracy or
democracy, it is easy to appoint a general for life; and there are many
who entrust the administration of affairs to one person only; such is
the government at Dyrrachium, and nearly the same at Opus. As for an
absolute monarchy as it is called, that is to say, when the whole state
is wholly subject to the will of one person, namely the king, it seems
to many that it is unnatural that one man should have the entire rule
over his fellow-citizens when the state consists of equals: for nature
requires that the same right and the same rank should necessarily take
place amongst all those who are equal by nature: for as it would be
hurtful to the body for those who are of different constitutions to
observe the same regimen, either of diet or clothing, so is it with
respect to the honours of the state as hurtful, that those who are equal
in merit should be unequal in rank; for which reason it is as much
a man's duty to submit to command as to assume it, and this also by
rotation; for this is law, for order is law; and it is more proper that
law should govern than any one of the citizens: upon the same principle,
if it is advantageous to place the supreme power in some particular
persons, they should be appointed to be only guardians, and the servants
of the laws, for the supreme power must be placed somewhere; but they
say, that it is unjust that where all are equal one person should
continually enjoy it. But it seems unlikely that man should be able to
adjust that which the law cannot determine; it may be replied, that the
law having laid down the best rules possible, leaves the adjustment and
application of particulars to the discretion of the magistrate; besides,
it allows anything to be altered which experience proves may be better
established. Moreover, he who would place the supreme power in mind,
would place it in God and the laws; but he who entrusts man with it,
gives it to a wild beast, for such his appetites sometimes make him; for
passion influences those who are in power, even the very best of men:
for which reason law is reason without desire.

The instance taken from the arts seems fallacious: wherein it is said to
be wrong for a sick person to apply for a remedy to books, but that it
would be far more eligible to employ those who are skilful in physic;
for these do nothing contrary to reason from motives of friendship
but earn their money by curing the sick, whereas those who have the
management of public affairs do many things through hatred or favour.
And, as a proof of what we have advanced, it may be observed, that
whenever a sick person suspects that his physician has been persuaded by
his enemies to be guilty of any foul practice to him in his profession,
he then rather chooses to apply to books for his cure: and not only this
[1287b] but even physicians themselves when they are ill call in other
physicians: and those who teach others the gymnastic exercises,
exercise with those of the same profession, as being incapable from
self-partiality to form a proper judgment of what concerns themselves.
From whence it is evident, that those who seek for what is just, seek
for a mean; now law is a mean. Moreover; the moral law is far superior
and conversant with far superior objects than the written law; for the
supreme magistrate is safer to be trusted to than the one, though he is
inferior to the other. But as it is impossible that one person should
have an eye to everything himself, it will be necessary that the supreme
magistrate should employ several subordinate ones under him; why then
should not this be done at first, instead of appointing one person in
this manner? Besides, if, according to what has been already said, the
man of worth is on that account fit to govern, two men of worth are
certainly better than one: as, for instance, in Homer, "Let two together
go:" and also Agamemnon's wish; "Were ten such faithful counsel mine!"
Not but that there are even now some particular magistrates invested
with supreme power to decide, as judges, those things which the law
cannot, as being one of those cases which comes not properly under its
jurisdiction; for of those which can there is no doubt: since then laws
comprehend some things, but not all, it is necessary to enquire and
consider which of the two is preferable, that the best man or the best
law should govern; for to reduce every subject which can come under the
deliberation of man into a law is impossible.

No one then denies, that it is necessary that there should be some
person to decide those cases which cannot come under the cognisance of
a written law: but we say, that it is better to have many than one;
for though every one who decides according to the principles of the law
decides justly; yet surely it seems absurd to suppose, that one person
can see better with two eyes, and hear better with two ears, or do
better with two hands and two feet, than many can do with many: for we
see that absolute monarchs now furnish themselves with many eyes and
ears and hands and feet; for they entrust those who are friends to
them and their government with part of their power; for if they are not
friends to the monarch, they will not do what he chooses; but if they
are friends to him, they are friends also to his government: but a
friend is an equal and like his friend: if then he thinks that such
should govern, he thinks that his equal also should govern. These are
nearly the objections which are usually made to a kingly power.




CHAPTER XVII


Probably what we have said may be true of some persons, but not of
others; for some men are by nature formed to be under the government of
a master; others, of a king; others, to be the citizens of a free state,
just and useful; but a tyranny is not according to nature, nor the other
perverted forms of government; for they are contrary to it. But it
is evident from what has been said, that among equals it is neither
advantageous nor [1288a] right that one person should be lord over all
where there are no established laws, but his will is the law; or where
there are; nor is it right that one who is good should have it over
those who are good; or one who is not good over those who are not good;
nor one who is superior to the rest in worth, except in a particular
manner, which shall be described, though indeed it has been already
mentioned. But let us next determine what people are best qualified
for a kingly government, what for an aristocratic, and what for a
democratic. And, first, for a kingly; and it should be those who are
accustomed by nature to submit the civil government of themselves to a
family eminent for virtue: for an aristocracy, those who are naturally
framed to bear the rule of free men, whose superior virtue makes them
worthy of the management of others: for a free state, a war-like people,
formed by nature both to govern and be governed by laws which admit the
poorest citizen to share the honours of the commonwealth according
to his worth. But whenever a whole family or any one of another shall
happen so far to excel in virtue as to exceed all other persons in the
community, then it is right that the kingly power should be in them, or
if it is an individual who does so, that he should be king and lord of
all; for this, as we have just mentioned, is not only correspondent
to that principle of right which all founders of all states, whether
aristocracies, oligarchies, or democracies, have a regard to (for
in placing the supreme power they all think it right to fix it to
excellence, though not the same); but it is also agreeable to what
has been already said; as it would not be right to kill, or banish, or
ostracise such a one for his superior merit. Nor would it be proper
to let him have the supreme power only in turn; for it is contrary to
nature that what is highest should ever be lowest: but this would be
the case should such a one ever be governed by others. So that there can
nothing else be done but to submit, and permit him continually to
enjoy the supreme power. And thus much with respect to kingly power in
different states, and whether it is or is not advantageous to them, and
to what, and in what manner.




CHAPTER XVIII


Since then we have said that there are three sorts of regular
governments, and of these the best must necessarily be that which is
administered by the best men (and this must be that which happens to
have one man, or one family, or a number of persons excelling all the
rest in virtue, who are able to govern and be governed in such a manner
as will make life most agreeable, and we have already shown that the
virtue of a good man and of a citizen in the most perfect government
will be the same), it is evident, that in the same manner, and for those
very qualities which would procure a man the character of good, any
one would say, that the government of a state was a well-established
aristocracy or kingdom; so that it will be found to be education and
[1288b] morals that are almost the whole which go to make a good man,
and the same qualities will make a good citizen or good king.

These particulars being treated of, we will now proceed to consider
what sort of government is best, how it naturally arises, and how it
is established; for it is necessary to make a proper inquiry concerning
this.




BOOK IV




CHAPTER I


In every art and science which is not conversant in parts but in some
one genus in which it is complete, it is the business of that art alone
to determine what is fitted to its particular genus; as what particular
exercise is fitted to a certain particular body, and suits it best: for
that body which is formed by nature the most perfect and superior to
others necessarily requires the best exercise-and also of what one kind
that must be which will suit the generality; and this is the business of
the gymnastic arts: and although any one should not desire to acquire
an exact knowledge and skill in these exercises, yet it is not, on that
account, the less necessary that he who professes to be a master and
instruct the youth in them should be perfect therein: and we see that
this is what equally befalls the healing, shipbuilding, cloth-making,
and indeed all other arts; so that it evidently belongs to the same art
to find out what kind of government is best, and would of all others be
most correspondent to our wish, while it received no molestation from
without: and what particular species of it is adapted to particular
persons; for there are many who probably are incapable of enjoying the
best form: so that the legislator, and he who is truly a politician,
ought to be acquainted not only with that which is most perfect
imaginable, but also that which is the best suited to any given
circumstances. There is, moreover, a third sort, an imaginary one, and
he ought, if such a one should be presented to his consideration, to be
able to discern what sort of one it would be at the beginning; and, when
once established, what would be the proper means to preserve it a long
time. I mean, for instance, if a state should happen not to have the
best form of government, or be deficient in what was necessary, or not
receive every advantage possible, but something less. And, besides all
this, it is necessary to know what sort of government is best fitting
for all cities: for most of those writers who have treated this subject,
however speciously they may handle other parts of it, have failed in
describing the practical parts: for it is not enough to be able to
perceive what is best without it is what can be put in practice. It
should also be simple, and easy for all to attain to. But some seek only
the most subtile forms of government. Others again, choosing [1289a]
rather to treat of what is common, censure those under which they live,
and extol the excellence of a particular state, as the Lacedaemonian,
or some other: but every legislator ought to establish such a form of
government as from the present state and disposition of the people who
are to receive it they will most readily submit to and persuade the
community to partake of: for it is not a business of less trouble to
correct the mistakes of an established government than to form a new
one; as it is as difficult to recover what we have forgot as to learn
anything afresh. He, therefore, who aspires to the character of a
legislator, ought, besides all we have already said, to be able to
correct the mistakes of a government already established, as we have
before mentioned. But this is impossible to be done by him who does
not know how many different forms of government there are: some persons
think that there is only one species both of democracy and oligarchy;
but this is not true: so that every one should be acquainted with the
difference of these governments, how great they are, and whence they
arise; and should have equal knowledge to perceive what laws are best,
and what are most suitable to each particular government: for all
laws are, and ought to be, framed agreeable to the state that is to be
governed by them, and not the state to the laws: for government is a
certain ordering in a state which particularly respects the magistrates
in what manner they shall be regulated, and where the supreme power
shall be placed; and what shall be the final object which each community
shall have in view; but the laws are something different from what
regulates and expresses the form of the constitution-it is their office
to direct the conduct of the magistrate in the execution of his office
and the punishment of offenders. From whence it is evident, that the
founders of laws should attend both to the number and the different
sorts of government; for it is impossible that the same laws should be
calculated for all sorts of oligarchies and all sorts of democracies,
for of both these governments there are many species, not one only.




CHAPTER II


Since, then, according to our first method in treating of the different
forms of government, we have divided those which are regular into three
sorts, the kingly, the aristocratical, the free states, and shown
the three excesses which these are liable to: the kingly, of becoming
tyrannical; the aristocratical, oligarchical; and the free state,
democratical: and as we have already treated of the aristocratical and
kingly; for to enter into an inquiry what sort of government is best
is the same thing as to treat of these two expressly; for each of
them desires to be established upon the principles of virtue: and as,
moreover, we have already determined wherein a kingly power and an
aristocracy differ from each other, and when a state may be said to be
governed by a king, it now remains that we examine into a free state,
and also these other governments, an oligarchy, a democracy, and a
[1289b] tyranny; and it is evident of these three excesses which must be
the worst of all, and which next to it; for, of course, the excesses of
the best and most holy must be the worst; for it must necessarily happen
either that the name of king only will remain, or else that the king
will assume more power than belongs to him, from whence tyranny will
arise, the worst excess imaginable, a government the most contrary
possible to a free state. The excess next hurtful is an oligarchy; for
an aristocracy differs much from this sort of government: that which is
least so is a democracy. This subject has been already treated of by one
of those writers who have gone before me, though his sentiments are not
the same as mine: for he thought, that of all excellent constitutions,
as a good oligarchy or the like, a democracy was the worst, but of all
bad ones, the best.

Now I affirm, that all these states have, without exception, fallen into
excess; and also that he should not have said that one oligarchy was
better than another, but that it was not quite so bad. But this question
we shall not enter into at present. We shall first inquire how many
different sorts of free states there are; since there are many
species of democracies and oligarchies; and which of them is the most
comprehensive, and most desirable after the best form of government; or
if there is any other like an aristocracy, well established; and also
which of these is best adapted to most cities, and which of them is
preferable for particular persons: for, probably, some may suit better
with an oligarchy than a democracy, and others better with a democracy
than an oligarchy; and afterwards in what manner any one ought to
proceed who desires to establish either of these states, I mean every
species of democracy, and also of oligarchy. And to conclude, when we
shall have briefly gone through everything that is necessary, we will
endeavour to point out the sources of corruption, and stability, in
government, as well those which are common to all as those which are
peculiar to each state, and from what causes they chiefly arise.




CHAPTER III


The reason for there being many different sorts of governments is this,
that each state consists of a great number of parts; for, in the first
place, we see that all cities are made up of families: and again, of
the multitude of these some must be rich, some poor, and others in the
middle station; and that, both of the rich and poor, some will be used
to arms, others not. We see also, that some of the common people are
husbandmen, others attend the market, and others are artificers. There
is also a difference between the nobles in their wealth, and the dignity
in which they live: for instance, in the number of horses they breed;
for this cannot be supported without a large fortune: for which reason,
in former times, those cities whose strength consisted in horse became
by that means oligarchies; and they used horse in their expeditions
against the neighbouring cities; as the Eretrians the Chalcidians, the
Magnetians, who lived near the river Meander, and many others in Asia.
Moreover, besides the difference of fortune, there is that which arises
from family and merit; or, if there are any other distinctions [1290a]
which make part of the city, they have been already mentioned in
treating of an aristocracy, for there we considered how many parts each
city must necessarily be composed of; and sometimes each of these have a
share in the government, sometimes a few, sometimes more.

It is evident then, that there must be many forms of government,
differing from each other in their particular constitution: for the
parts of which they are composed each differ from the other. For
government is the ordering of the magistracies of the state; and these
the community share between themselves, either as they can attain them
by force, or according to some common equality which there is amongst
them, as poverty, wealth, or something which they both partake of. There
must therefore necessarily be as many different forms of governments as
there are different ranks in the society, arising from the superiority
of some over others, and their different situations. And these seem
chiefly to be two, as they say, of the winds: namely, the north and
the south; and all the others are declinations from these. And thus in
politics, there is the government of the many and the government of
the few; or a democracy and an oligarchy: for an aristocracy may be
considered as a species of oligarchy, as being also a government of the
few; and what we call a free state may be considered as a democracy: as
in the winds they consider the west as part of the north, and the east
as part of the south: and thus it is in music, according to some, who
say there are only two species of it, the Doric and the Phrygian, and
all other species of composition they call after one of these names; and
many people are accustomed to consider the nature of government in the
same light; but it is both more convenient and more correspondent to
truth to distinguish governments as I have done, into two species: one,
of those which are established upon proper principles; of which there
may be one or two sorts: the other, which includes all the different
excesses of these; so that we may compare the best form of government to
the most harmonious piece of music; the oligarchic and despotic to the
more violent tunes; and the democratic to the soft and gentle airs.




CHAPTER IV


We ought not to define a democracy as some do, who say simply, that it
is a government where the supreme power is lodged in the people; for
even in oligarchies the supreme power is in the majority. Nor should
they define an oligarchy a government where the supreme power is in the
hands of a few: for let us suppose the number of a people to be thirteen
hundred, and that of these one thousand were rich, who would not permit
the three hundred poor to have any share in the government, although
they were free, and their equal in everything else; no one would say,
that this government was a democracy. In like manner, if the poor, when
few in number, should acquire the power over the rich, though more than
themselves, no one would say, that this was an oligarchy; nor this, when
the rest who are rich have no share in the administration. We should
rather say, that a democracy is when the supreme power is in the [1290b]
hands of the freemen; an oligarchy, when it is in the hands of the rich:
it happens indeed that in the one case the many will possess it, in
the other the few; because there are many poor and few rich. And if the
power of the state was to be distributed according to the size of the
citizens, as they say it is in Ethiopia, or according to their beauty,
it would be an oligarchy: for the number of those who are large and
beautiful is small.

Nor are those things which we have already mentioned alone sufficient
to describe these states; for since there are many species both of a
democracy and an oligarchy, the matter requires further consideration;
as we cannot admit, that if a few persons who are free possess the
supreme power over the many who are not free, that this government is a
democracy: as in Apollonia, in Ionia, and in Thera: for in each of these
cities the honours of the state belong to some few particular families,
who first founded the colonies. Nor would the rich, because they are
superior in numbers, form a democracy, as formerly at Colophon; for
there the majority had large possessions before the Lydian war: but a
democracy is a state where the freemen and the poor, being the majority,
are invested with the power of the state. An oligarchy is a state where
the rich and those of noble families, being few, possess it.

We have now proved that there are various forms of government and have
assigned a reason for it; and shall proceed to show that there are
even more than these, and what they are, and why; setting out with the
principle we have already laid down. We admit that every city consists
not of one, but many parts: thus, if we should endeavour to comprehend
the different species of animals we should first of all note those parts
which every animal must have, as a certain sensorium, and also what is
necessary to acquire and retain food, as a mouth and a belly; besides
certain parts to enable it to move from place to place. If, then, these
are the only parts of an animal and there are differences between them;
namely, in their various sorts of stomachs, bellies, and sensoriums: to
which we must add their motive powers; the number of the combinations of
all these must necessarily make up the different species of animals.
For it is not possible that the same kind of animal should have any
very great difference in its mouth or ears; so that when all these are
collected, who happen to have these things similar in all, they make up
a species of animals of which there are as many as there are of these
general combinations of necessary parts.

The same thing is true of what are called states; for a city is not made
of one but many parts, as has already been often said; one of which is
those who supply it with provisions, called husbandmen, another called
mechanics, [1291a] whose employment is in the manual arts, without which
the city could not be inhabited; of these some are busied about what is
absolutely necessary, others in what contribute to the elegancies and
pleasures of life; the third sort are your exchange-men, I mean by these
your buyers, sellers, merchants, and victuallers; the fourth are your
hired labourers or workmen; the fifth are the men-at-arms, a rank not
less useful than the other, without you would have the community slaves
to every invader; but what cannot defend itself is unworthy of the name
of a city; for a city is self-sufficient, a slave not. So that when
Socrates, in Plato's Republic, says that a city is necessarily composed
of four sorts of people, he speaks elegantly but not correctly, and
these are, according to him, weavers, husbandmen, shoe-makers, and
builders; he then adds, as if these were not sufficient, smiths,
herdsmen for what cattle are necessary, and also merchants and
victuallers, and these are by way of appendix to his first list; as if
a city was established for necessity, and not happiness, or as if a
shoe-maker and a husbandman were equally useful. He reckons not the
military a part before the increase of territory and joining to the
borders of the neighbouring powers will make war necessary: and even
amongst them who compose his four divisions, or whoever have any
connection with each other, it will be necessary to have some one to
distribute justice, and determine between man and man. If, then, the
mind is a more valuable part of man than the body, every one would
wish to have those things more regarded in his city which tend to the
advantage of these than common matters, such are war and justice; to
which may be added council, which is the business of civil wisdom (nor
is it of any consequence whether these different employments are filled
by different persons or one, as the same man is oftentimes both a
soldier and a husbandman): so that if both the judge and the senator are
parts of the city, it necessarily follows that the soldier must be
so also. The seventh sort are those who serve the public in expensive
employments at their own charge: these are called the rich. The eighth
are those who execute the different offices of the state, and without
these it could not possibly subsist: it is therefore necessary that
there should be some persons capable of governing and filling the places
in the city; and this either for life or in rotation: the office of
senator, and judge, of which we have already sufficiently treated, are
the only ones remaining. If, then, these things are necessary for a
state, that it may be happy and just, it follows that the citizens who
engage in public affairs should be men of abilities therein. [1291b]
Several persons think, that different employments may be allotted to the
same person; as a soldier's, a husbandman's, and an artificer's; as also
that others may be both senators and judges.

Besides, every one supposes himself a man of political abilities, and
that he is qualified for almost every department in the state. But the
same person cannot at once be poor and rich: for which reason the most
obvious division of the city is into two parts, the poor and rich;
moreover, since for the generality the one are few, the other many, they
seem of all the parts of a city most contrary to each other; so that as
the one or the other prevail they form different states; and these are
the democracy and the oligarchy.

But that there are many different states, and from what causes they
arise, has been already mentioned: and that there are also different
species both of democracies and oligarchies we will now show. Though
this indeed is evident from what we have already said: there are also
many different sorts of common people, and also of those who are
called gentlemen. Of the different sorts of the first are husbandmen,
artificers, exchange-men, who are employed in buying and selling,
seamen, of which some are engaged in war, some in traffic, some in
carrying goods and passengers from place to place, others in fishing,
and of each of these there are often many, as fishermen at Tarentum and
Byzantium, masters of galleys at Athens, merchants at AEgina and Chios,
those who let ships on freight at Tenedos; we may add to these those who
live by their manual labour and have but little property; so that they
cannot live without some employ: and also those who are not free-born
on both sides, and whatever other sort of common people there may be.
As for gentlemen, they are such as are distinguished either by their
fortune, their birth, their abilities, or their education, or any
such-like excellence which is attributed to them.

The most pure democracy is that which is so called principally from that
equality which prevails in it: for this is what the law in that state
directs; that the poor shall be in no greater subjection than the rich;
nor that the supreme power shall be lodged with either of these, but
that both shall share it. For if liberty and equality, as some persons
suppose, are chiefly to be found in a democracy, it must be most so
by every department of government being alike open to all; but as the
people are the majority, and what they vote is law, it follows that such
a state must be a democracy. This, then, is one species thereof. Another
is, when the magistrates are elected by a certain census; but this
should be but small, and every one who was included in it should be
eligible, but as soon as he was below it should lose that right. [1292a]
Another sort is, in which every citizen who is not infamous has a share
in the government, but where the government is in the laws. Another,
where every citizen without exception has this right. Another is like
these in other particulars, but there the people govern, and not the
law: and this takes place when everything is determined by a majority of
votes, and not by a law; which happens when the people are influenced by
the demagogues: for where a democracy is governed by stated laws there
is no room for them, but men of worth fill the first offices in the
state: but where the power is not vested in the laws, there demagogues
abound: for there the people rule with kingly power: the whole composing
one body; for they are supreme, not as individuals but in their
collective capacity.

Homer also discommends the government of many; but whether he means this
we are speaking of, or where each person exercises his power separately,
is uncertain. When the people possess this power they desire to be
altogether absolute, that they may not be under the control of the law,
and this is the time when flatterers are held in repute. Nor is there
any difference between such a people and monarchs in a tyranny: for
their manners are the same, and they both hold a despotic power over
better persons than themselves. For their decrees are like the others'
edicts; their demagogues like the others' flatterers: but their greatest
resemblance consists in the mutual support they give to each other, the
flatterer to the tyrant, the demagogue to the people: and to them it is
owing that the supreme power is lodged in the votes of the people,
and not in the laws; for they bring everything before them, as their
influence is owing to their being supreme whose opinions they entirely
direct; for these are they whom the multitude obey. Besides, those who
accuse the magistrates insist upon it, that the right of determining on
their conduct lies in the people, who gladly receive their complaints as
the means of destroying all their offices.

Any one, therefore, may with great justice blame such a government as
being a democracy, and not a free state; for where the government is
not in the laws, then there is no free state, for the law ought to be
supreme over all things; and particular incidents which arise should be
determined by the magistrates or the state. If, therefore, a
democracy is to be reckoned a free state, it is evident that any such
establishment which centres all power in the votes of the people cannot,
properly speaking, be a democracy: for their decrees cannot be general
in their extent. Thus, then, we may describe the several species of
democracies.




CHAPTER V


Of the different species of oligarchies one is, when the right to the
offices is regulated by a certain census; so that the poor, although the
majority, have no share in it; while all those who are included therein
take part in the management of public affairs. Another sort is, when
[1292b] the magistrates are men of very small fortune, who upon any
vacancy do themselves fill it up: and if they do this out of the
community at large, the state approaches to an aristocracy; if out of
any particular class of people, it will be an oligarchy. Another sort of
oligarchy is, when the power is an hereditary nobility. The fourth is,
when the power is in the same hands as the other, but not under the
control of law; and this sort of oligarchy exactly corresponds to a
tyranny in monarchies, and to that particular species of democracies
which I last mentioned in treating of that state: this has the
particular name of a dynasty. These are the different sorts of
oligarchies and democracies.

It should also be known, that it often happens that a free state, where
the supreme power is in the laws, may not be democratic, and yet in
consequence of the established manners and customs of the people, may
be governed as if it was; so, on the other hand, where the laws may
countenance a more democratic form of government, these may make the
state inclining to an oligarchy; and this chiefly happens when there
has been any alteration in the government; for the people do not easily
change, but love their own ancient customs; and it is by small degrees
only that one thing takes place of another; so that the ancient laws
will remain, while the power will be in the hands of those who have
brought about a revolution in the state.




CHAPTER VI


It is evident from what has been said, that there are as many different
sorts of democracies and oligarchies as I have reckoned up: for, of
necessity, either all ranks of the people which I have enumerated must
have a share in the government, or some only, and others not; for when
the husbandmen, and those only who possess moderate fortunes, have the
supreme power, they will govern according to law; for as they must get
their livings by their employs, they have but little leisure for public
business: they will therefore establish proper laws, and never call
public assemblies but when there is a necessity for them; and they will
readily let every one partake with them in the administration of public
affairs as soon as they possess that fortune which the law requires for
their qualification: every one, therefore, who is qualified will have
his share in the government: for to exclude any would be to make the
government an oligarchy, and for all to have leisure to attend
without they had a subsistence would be impossible: for these reasons,
therefore, this government is a species of democracy. Another species is
distinguished by the mode of electing their magistrates, in which every
one is eligible, to whose birth there are no objections, provided he is
supposed to have leisure to attend: for which reason in such a democracy
the supreme power will be vested in the laws, as there will be nothing
paid to those who go to the public assemblies. A third species is where
every freeman has a right to a share in the government, which he will
not accept for the cause already assigned; for which reason here also
the supreme power will be in the law. The fourth species [1293a] of
democracy, the last which was established in order of time, arose when
cities were greatly enlarged to what they were at first, and when the
public revenue became something considerable; for then the populace, on
account of their numbers, were admitted to share in the management of
public affairs, for then even the poorest people were at leisure to
attend to them, as they received wages for so doing; nay, they were more
so than others, as they were not hindered by having anything of their
own to mind, as the rich had; for which reason these last very often did
not frequent the public assemblies and the courts of justice: thus the
supreme power was lodged in the poor, and not in the laws. These are
the different sorts of democracies, and such are the causes which
necessarily gave birth to them.

The first species of oligarchy is, when the generality of the state are
men of moderate and not too large property; for this gives them leisure
for the management of public affairs: and, as they are a numerous body,
it necessarily follows that the supreme power must be in the laws, and
not in men; for as they are far removed from a monarchical government,
and have not sufficient fortune to neglect their private affairs, while
they are too many to be supported by the public, they will of course
determine to be governed by the laws, and not by each other. But if the
men of property in the state are but few, and their property is large,
then an oligarchy of the second sort will take place; for those who have
most power will think that they have a right to lord it over the others;
and, to accomplish this, they will associate to themselves some who have
an inclination for public affairs, and as they are not powerful enough
to govern without law, they will make a law for that purpose. And if
those few who have large fortunes should acquire still greater power,
the oligarchy will then alter into one of the third sort; for they will
get all the offices of the state into their own hands by a law which
directs the son to succeed upon the death of his father; and,
after that, when, by means of their increasing wealth and powerful
connections, they extend still further their oppression, a monarchical
dynasty will directly succeed wherein men will be supreme, and not the
law; and this is the fourth species of an oligarchy correspondent to the
last-mentioned class of democracies.




CHAPTER VII


There are besides two other states, a democracy and an oligarchy, one
of which all speak of, and it is always esteemed a species of the
four sorts; and thus they reckon them up; a monarchy, an oligarchy, a
democracy, and this fourth which they call an aristocracy. There is
also a fifth, which bears a name that is also common to the other four,
namely, a state: but as this is seldom to be met with, it has escaped
those who have endeavoured to enumerate the different sorts of
governments, which [1293b] they fix at four only, as does Plato in his
Republic.

An aristocracy, of which I have already treated in the first book, is
rightly called so; for a state governed by the best men, upon the most
virtuous principles, and not upon any hypothesis, which even good men
may propose, has alone a right to be called an aristocracy, for it is
there only that a man is at once a good man and a good citizen; while in
other states men are good only relative to those states. Moreover, there
are some other states which are called by the same name, that differ
both from oligarchies and free states, wherein not only the rich but
also the virtuous have a share in the administration; and have therefore
acquired the name of aristocracies; for in those governments wherein
virtue is not their common care, there are still men of worth and
approved goodness. Whatever state, then, like the Carthaginians,
favours the rich, the virtuous, and the citizens at large, is a sort
of aristocracy: when only the two latter are held in esteem, as at
Lacedaemon, and the state is jointly composed of these, it is a virtuous
democracy. These are the two species of aristocracies after the first,
which is the best of all governments. There is also a third, which is,
whenever a free state inclines to the dominion of a few.




CHAPTER VIII


It now remains for us to treat of that government which is particularly
called a free state, and also of a tyranny; and the reason for my
choosing to place that free state here is, because this, as well
as those aristocracies already mentioned, although they do not seem
excesses, yet, to speak true, they have all departed from what a perfect
government is. Nay, they are deviations both of them equally from other
forms, as I said at the beginning. It is proper to mention a tyranny the
last of all governments, for it is of all others the least like one:
but as my intention is to treat of all governments in general, for this
reason that also, as I have said, will be taken into consideration in
its proper place.

I shall now inquire into a free state and show what it is; and we shall
the better understand its positive nature as we have already described
an oligarchy and a democracy; for a free state is indeed nothing more
than a mixture of them, and it has been usual to call those which
incline most to a democracy, a free state; those which incline most to
an oligarchy, an aristocracy, because those who are rich are generally
men of family and education; besides, they enjoy those things which
others are often guilty of crimes to procure: for which reason they are
regarded as men of worth and honour and note.

Since, then, it is the genius of an aristocracy to allot the larger
part of the government to the best citizens, they therefore say, that
an oligarchy is chiefly composed of those men who are worthy and
honourable: now it [1294a] seems impossible that where the government
is in the hands of the good, there the laws should not be good, but bad;
or, on the contrary, that where the government is in the hands of the
bad, there the laws should be good; nor is a government well constituted
because the laws are, without at the same time care is taken that they
are observed; for to enforce obedience to the laws which it makes is one
proof of a good constitution in the state-another is, to have laws well
calculated for those who are to abide by them; for if they are improper
they must be obeyed: and this may be done two ways, either by their
being the best relative to the particular state, or the best absolutely.
An aristocracy seems most likely to confer the honours of the state on
the virtuous; for virtue is the object of an aristocracy, riches of an
oligarchy, and liberty of a democracy; for what is approved of by the
majority will prevail in all or in each of these three different states;
and that which seems good to most of those who compose the community
will prevail: for what is called a state prevails in many communities,
which aim at a mixture of rich and poor, riches and liberty: as for
the rich, they are usually supposed to take the place of the worthy and
honourable. As there are three things which claim an equal rank in the
state, freedom, riches, and virtue (for as for the fourth, rank, it is
an attendant on two of the others, for virtue and riches are the origin
of family), it is evident, that the conjuncture of the rich and the poor
make up a free state; but that all three tend to an aristocracy more
than any other, except that which is truly so, which holds the first
rank.

We have already seen that there are governments different from a
monarchy, a democracy, and an oligarchy; and what they are, and wherein
they differ from each other; and also aristocracies and states properly
so called, which are derived from them; and it is evident that these are
not much unlike each other.




CHAPTER IX


We shall next proceed to show how that government which is peculiarly
called a state arises alongside of democracy and oligarchy, and how it
ought to be established; and this will at the same time show what are
the proper boundaries of both these governments, for we must mark out
wherein they differ from one another, and then from both these compose
a state of such parts of each of them as will show from whence they were
taken.

There are three different ways in which two states may be blended and
joined together; for, in the first place, all those rules may be adopted
which the laws of each of them have ordered; as for instance in the
judicial department, for in an oligarchy the rich are fined if they do
not come to the court as jurymen, but the poor are not paid for their
attendance; but in democracies they are, while the rich are not fined
for their neglect. Now these things, as being common to both, are fit
to be observed in a free [1294b] state which is composed of both. This,
then, is one way in which they may be joined together. In the second
place, a medium may be taken between the different methods which each
state observes; for instance, in a democracy the right to vote in the
public assembly is either confined by no census at all, or limited by a
very small one; in an oligarchy none enjoy it but those whose census is
high: therefore, as these two practices are contrary to each other, a
census between each may be established in such a state. In the third
place, different laws of each community may be adopted; as, for
instance, as it seems correspondent to the nature of a democracy, that
the magistrates should be chosen by lot, but an aristocracy by vote, and
in the one state according to a census, but not in the other: let, then,
an aristocracy and a free state copy something from each of them; let
them follow an oligarchy in choosing their magistrates by vote, but a
democracy in not admitting of any census, and thus blend together the
different customs of the two governments. But the best proof of a happy
mixture of a democracy and an oligarchy is this, when a person may
properly call the same state a democracy and an oligarchy. It is evident
that those who speak of it in this manner are induced to it because both
these governments are there well blended together: and indeed this
is common to all mediums, that the extremes of each side should be
discerned therein, as at Lacedaemon; for many affirm that it is a
democracy from the many particulars in which it follows that form of
government; as for instance, in the first place, in the bringing up of
their children, for the rich and poor are brought up in the same manner;
and their education is such that the children of the poor may partake of
it; and the same rules are observed when they are youths and men, there
is no distinction between a rich person and a poor one; and in their
public tables the same provision is served to all. The rich also wear
only such clothes as the poorest man is able to purchase. Moreover, with
respect to two magistracies of the highest rank, one they have a right
to elect to, the other to fill; namely, the senate and the ephori.
Others consider it as an oligarchy, the principles of which it follows
in many things, as in choosing all their officers by vote, and not by
lot; in there being but a few who have a right to sit in judgment on
capital causes and the like. Indeed, a state which is well composed of
two others ought to resemble them both, and neither, Such a state ought
to have its means of preservation in itself, and not without; and when I
say in itself, I do not mean that it should owe this to the forbearance
of their neighbours, for this may happen to a bad government, but to
every member of the community's not being willing that there should be
the least alteration in their constitution. Such is the method in which
a free state or aristocracy ought to be established.




CHAPTER X


It now remains to treat of a tyranny; not that there is [1295a] much
to be said on that subject, but as it makes part of our plan, since
we enumerated it amongst our different sorts of governments. In the
beginning of this work we inquired into the nature of kingly government,
and entered into a particular examination of what was most properly
called so, and whether it was advantageous to a state or not, and what
it should be, and how established; and we divided a tyranny into two
pieces when we were upon this subject, because there is something
analogous between this and a kingly government, for they are both of
them established by law; for among some of the barbarians they elect a
monarch with absolute power, and formerly among the Greeks there were
some such, whom they called sesumnetes. Now these differ from each
other; for some possess only kingly power regulated by law, and
rule those who voluntarily submit to their government; others rule
despotically according to their own will. There is a third species of
tyranny, most properly so called, which is the very opposite to kingly
power; for this is the government of one who rules over his equals and
superiors without being accountable for his conduct, and whose object is
his own advantage, and not the advantage of those he governs; for which
reason he rules by compulsion, for no freemen will ever willingly submit
to such a government. These are the different species of tyrannies,
their principles, and their causes.




CHAPTER XI


We proceed now to inquire what form of government and what manner
of life is best for communities in general, not adapting it to that
superior virtue which is above the reach of the vulgar, or that
education which every advantage of nature and fortune only can furnish,
nor to those imaginary plans which may be formed at pleasure; but to
that mode of life which the greater part of mankind can attain to,
and that government which most cities may establish: for as to those
aristocracies which we have now mentioned, they are either too perfect
for a state to support, or one so nearly alike to that state we now
going to inquire into, that we shall treat of them both as one.

The opinions which we form upon these subjects must depend upon one
common principle: for if what I have said in my treatise on Morals is
true, a happy life must arise from an uninterrupted course of virtue;
and if virtue consists in a certain medium, the middle life must
certainly be the happiest; which medium is attainable [1295b] by
every one. The boundaries of virtue and vice in the state must also
necessarily be the same as in a private person; for the form of
government is the life of the city. In every city the people are divided
into three sorts; the very rich, the very poor, and those who are
between them. If this is universally admitted, that the mean is best, it
is evident that even in point of fortune mediocrity is to be preferred;
for that state is most submissive to reason; for those who are very
handsome, or very strong, or very noble, or very rich; or, on the
contrary; those who are very poor, or very weak, or very mean, with
difficulty obey it; for the one are capricious and greatly flagitious,
the other rascally and mean, the crimes of each arising from their
different excesses: nor will they go through the different offices
of the state; which is detrimental to it: besides, those who excel in
strength, in riches, or friends, or the like, neither know how nor are
willing to submit to command: and this begins at home when they are
boys; for there they are brought up too delicately to be accustomed to
obey their preceptors: as for the very poor, their general and excessive
want of what the rich enjoy reduces them to a state too mean: so that
the one know not how to command, but to be commanded as slaves, the
others know not how to submit to any command, nor to command themselves
but with despotic power.

A city composed of such men must therefore consist of slaves and
masters, not freemen; where one party must hate, and the other
despise, where there could be no possibility of friendship or political
community: for community supposes affection; for we do not even on the
road associate with our enemies. It is also the genius of a city to be
composed as much as possible of equals; which will be most so when the
inhabitants are in the middle state: from whence it follows, that that
city must be best framed which is composed of those whom we say are
naturally its proper members. It is men of this station also who will be
best assured of safety and protection; for they will neither covet what
belongs to others, as the poor do; nor will others covet what is theirs,
as the poor do what belongs to the rich; and thus, without plotting
against any one, or having any one plot against them, they will live
free from danger: for which reason Phocylides wisely wishes for the
middle state, as being most productive of happiness. It is plain, then,
that the most perfect political community must be amongst those who are
in the middle rank, and those states are best instituted wherein these
are a larger and more respectable part, if possible, than both the
other; or, if that cannot be, at least than either of them separate;
so that being thrown into the balance it may prevent either scale from
preponderating.

It is therefore the greatest happiness which the citizens can enjoy to
possess a moderate and convenient fortune; for when some possess too
much, and others nothing at [1296a] all, the government must either be
in the hands of the meanest rabble or else a pure oligarchy; or, from
the excesses of both, a tyranny; for this arises from a headstrong
democracy or an oligarchy, but very seldom when the members of the
community are nearly on an equality with each other. We will assign a
reason for this when we come to treat of the alterations which different
states are likely to undergo. The middle state is therefore best, as
being least liable to those seditions and insurrections which disturb
the community; and for the same reason extensive governments are least
liable to these inconveniences; for there those in a middle state are
very numerous, whereas in small ones it is easy to pass to the two
extremes, so as hardly to have any in a medium remaining, but the
one half rich, the other poor: and from the same principle it is that
democracies are more firmly established and of longer continuance than
oligarchies; but even in those when there is a want of a proper number
of men of middling fortune, the poor extend their power too far, abuses
arise, and the government is soon at an end.

We ought to consider as a proof of what I now advance, that the best
lawgivers themselves were those in the middle rank of life, amongst whom
was Solon, as is evident from his poems, and Lycurgus, for he was not
a king, and Charondas, and indeed most others. What has been said will
show us why of so many free states some have changed to democracies,
others to oligarchies: for whenever the number of those in the middle
state has been too small, those who were the more numerous, whether the
rich or the poor, always overpowered them and assumed to themselves the
administration of public affairs; from hence arose either a democracy
or an oligarchy. Moreover, when in consequence of their disputes and
quarrels with each other, either the rich get the better of the poor, or
the poor of the rich, neither of them will establish a free state;
but, as the record of their victory, one which inclines to their own
principles, and form either a democracy or an oligarchy.

Those who made conquests in Greece, having all of them an eye to the
respective forms of government in their own cities, established either
democracies or oligarchies, not considering what was serviceable to the
state, but what was similar to their own; for which reason a government
has never been established where the supreme power has been placed
amongst those of the middling rank, or very seldom; and, amongst a few,
one man only of those who have yet been conquerors has been persuaded
to give the preference to this order of [1296b] men: it is indeed an
established custom with the inhabitants of most cities not to desire an
equality, but either to aspire to govern, or when they are conquered, to
submit.

Thus we have shown what the best state is, and why. It will not be
difficult to perceive of the many states which there are, for we have
seen that there are various forms both of democracies and oligarchies,
to which we should give the first place, to which the second, and in
the same manner the next also; and to observe what are the particular
excellences and defects of each, after we have first described the best
possible; for that must be the best which is nearest to this, that worst
which is most distant from the medium, without any one has a particular
plan of his own which he judges by. I mean by this, that it may happen,
that although one form of government may be better than another, yet
there is no reason to prevent another from being preferable thereunto in
particular circumstances and for particular purposes.




CHAPTER XII


After what has been said, it follows that we should now show what
particular form of government is most suitable for particular persons;
first laying this down as a general maxim, that that party which desires
to support the actual administration of the state ought always to be
superior to that which would alter it. Every city is made up of quality
and quantity: by quality I mean liberty, riches, education, and family,
and by quantity its relative populousness: now it may happen that
quality may exist in one of those parts of which the city is composed,
and quantity in another; thus the number of the ignoble may be greater
than the number of those of family, the number of the poor than that of
the rich; but not so that the quantity of the one shall overbalance the
quality of the other; those must be properly adjusted to each other; for
where the number of the poor exceeds the proportion we have mentioned,
there a democracy will rise up, and if the husbandry should have
more power than others, it will be a democracy of husbandmen; and the
democracy will be a particular species according to that class of
men which may happen to be most numerous: thus, should these be the
husbandmen, it will be of these, and the best; if of mechanics and those
who hire themselves out, the worst possible: in the same manner it may
be of any other set between these two. But when the rich and the noble
prevail more by their quality than they are deficient in quantity, there
an oligarchy ensues; and this oligarchy may be of different species,
according to the nature of the prevailing party. Every legislator in
framing his constitution ought to have a particular regard to those in
the middle rank of life; and if he intends an oligarchy, these should
be the object of his laws; if a democracy, to these they should be
entrusted; and whenever their number exceeds that of the two others, or
at least one of them, they give [1297a] stability to the constitution;
for there is no fear that the rich and the poor should agree to conspire
together against them, for neither of these will choose to serve the
other. If any one would choose to fix the administration on the widest
basis, he will find none preferable to this; for to rule by turns is
what the rich and the poor will not submit to, on account of their
hatred to each other. It is, moreover, allowed that an arbitrator is the
most proper person for both parties to trust to; now this arbitrator is
the middle rank.

Those who would establish aristocratical governments are mistaken not
only in giving too much power to the rich, but also in deceiving the
common people; for at last, instead of an imaginary good, they must feel
a real evil, for the encroachments of the rich are more destructive to
the state than those of the poor.




CHAPTER XIII


There are five particulars in which, under fair pretences, the rich
craftily endeavour to undermine the rights of the people, these are
their public assemblies, their offices of state, their courts of
justice, their military power, and their gymnastic exercises. With
respect to their public assemblies, in having them open to all, but in
fining the rich only, or others very little, for not attending; with
respect to offices, in permitting the poor to swear off, but not
granting this indulgence to those who are within the census;
with respect to their courts of justice, in fining the rich for
non-attendance, but the poor not at all, or those a great deal, and
these very little, as was done by the laws of Charondas. In some
places every citizen who was enrolled had a right to attend the public
assemblies and to try causes; which if they did not do, a very heavy
fine was laid upon them; that through fear of the fine they might avoid
being enrolled, as they were then obliged to do neither the one nor the
other. The same spirit of legislation prevailed with respect to their
bearing arms and their gymnastic exercises; for the poor are excused if
they have no arms, but the rich are fined; the same method takes place
if they do not attend their gymnastic exercises, there is no penalty on
one, but there is on the other: the consequence of which is, that the
fear of this penalty induces the rich to keep the one and attend the
other, while the poor do neither. These are the deceitful contrivances
of oligarchical legislators.

The contrary prevails in a democracy; for there they make the poor a
proper allowance for attending the assemblies and the courts, but give
the rich nothing for doing it: whence it is evident, that if any one
would properly blend these customs together, they must extend both the
pay and the fine to every member of the community, and then every one
would share in it, whereas part only now do. The citizens of a free
state ought to [1297b] consist of those only who bear arms: with respect
to their census it is not easy to determine exactly what it ought to be,
but the rule that should direct upon this subject should be to make it
as extensive as possible, so that those who are enrolled in it make up
a greater part of the people than those who are not; for those who are
poor, although they partake not of the offices of the state, are willing
to live quiet, provided that no one disturbs them in their property: but
this is not an easy matter; for it may not always happen, that those who
are at the head of public affairs are of a humane behaviour. In time
of war the poor are accustomed to show no alacrity without they have
provisions found them; when they have, then indeed they are willing to
fight.

In some governments the power is vested not only in those who bear arms,
but also in those who have borne them. Among the Malienses the state was
composed of these latter only, for all the officers were soldiers who
had served their time. And the first states in Greece which succeeded
those where kingly power was established, were governed by the military.
First of all the horse, for at that time the strength and excellence of
the army depended on the horse, for as to the heavy-armed foot they were
useless without proper discipline; but the art of tactics was not known
to the ancients, for which reason their strength lay in their horse: but
when cities grew larger, and they depended more on their foot, greater
numbers partook of the freedom of the city; for which reason what we
call republics were formerly called democracies. The ancient governments
were properly oligarchies or kingdoms; for on account of the few persons
in each state, it would have been impossible to have found a sufficient
number of the middle rank; so these being but few, and those used to
subordination, they more easily submitted to be governed.

We have now shown why there are many sorts of governments, and others
different from those we have treated of: for there are more species of
democracies than one, and the like is true of other forms, and what are
their differences, and whence they arise; and also of all others
which is the best, at least in general; and which is best suited for
particular people.




CHAPTER XIV


We will now proceed to make some general reflections upon the
governments next in order, and also to consider each of them in
particular; beginning with those principles which appertain to each: now
there are three things in all states which a careful legislator ought
well to consider, which are of great consequence to all, and which
properly attended to the state must necessarily be happy; and according
to the variation of which the one will differ from the other. The first
of these is the [1298a] public assembly; the second the officers of the
state, that is, who they ought to be, and with what power they should be
entrusted, and in what manner they should be appointed; the third, the
judicial department.

Now it is the proper business of the public assembly to determine
concerning war and peace, making or breaking off alliances, to enact
laws, to sentence to death, banishment, or confiscation of goods, and to
call the magistrates to account for their behaviour when in office. Now
these powers must necessarily be entrusted to the citizens in general,
or all of them to some; either to one magistrate or more; or some to
one, and some to another, or some to all, but others to some: to entrust
all to all is in the spirit of a democracy, for the people aim at
equality. There are many methods of delegating these powers to the
citizens at large, one of which is to let them execute them by turn, and
not altogether, as was done by Tellecles, the Milesian, in his state. In
others the supreme council is composed of the different magistrates,
and they succeed to the offices of the community by proper divisions of
tribes, wards, and other very small proportions, till every one in his
turn goes through them: nor does the whole community ever meet together,
without it is when new laws are enacted, or some national affair is
debated, or to hear what the magistrates have to propose to them.
Another method is for the people to meet in a collective body, but
only for the purpose of holding the comitia, making laws, determining
concerning war or peace, and inquiring into the conduct of their
magistrates, while the remaining part of the public business is
conducted by the magistrates, who have their separate departments, and
are chosen out of the whole community either by vote or ballot. Another
method is for the people in general to meet for the choice of the
magistrates, and to examine into their conduct; and also to deliberate
concerning war and alliances, and to leave other things to the
magistrates, whoever happen to be chosen, whose particular employments
are such as necessarily require persons well skilled therein. A fourth
method is for every person to deliberate upon every subject in public
assembly, where the magistrates can determine nothing of themselves, and
have only the privilege of giving their opinions first; and this is the
method of the most pure democracy, which is analogous to the proceedings
in a dynastic oligarchy and a tyrannic monarchy.

These, then, are the methods in which public business is conducted in a
democracy. When the power is in the hands of part of the community
only, it is an oligarchy and this also admits of different customs; for
whenever the officers of the state are chosen out of those who have a
moderate fortune, and these from that circumstance are many, and
when they depart not from that line which the law has laid down, but
carefully follow it, and when all within the census are eligible,
certainly it is then an oligarchy, but founded on true principles of
government [1298b] from its moderation. When the people in general do
not partake of the deliberative power, but certain persons chosen for
that purpose, who govern according to law; this also, like the first,
is an oligarchy. When those who have the deliberative power elect each
other, and the son succeeds to the father, and when they can supersede
the laws, such a government is of necessity a strict oligarchy. When
some persons determine on one thing, and others on another, as war and
peace, and when all inquire into the conduct of their magistrates, and
other things are left to different officers, elected either by vote or
lot, then the government is an aristocracy or a free state. When some
are chosen by vote and others by lot, and these either from the people
in general, or from a certain number elected for that purpose, or if
both the votes and the lots are open to all, such a state is partly an
aristocracy, partly a free government itself. These are the different
methods in which the deliberative power is vested in different states,
all of whom follow some regulation here laid down. It is advantageous to
a democracy, in the present sense of the word, by which I mean a state
wherein the people at large have a supreme power, even over the laws, to
hold frequent public assemblies; and it will be best in this particular
to imitate the example of oligarchies in their courts of justice; for
they fine those who are appointed to try causes if they do not attend,
so should they reward the poor for coming to the public assemblies:
and their counsels will be best when all advise with each other, the
citizens with the nobles, the nobles with the citizens. It is also
advisable when the council is to be composed of part of the citizens, to
elect, either by vote or lot, an equal number of both ranks. It is also
proper, if the common people in the state are very numerous, either not
to pay every one for his attendance, but such a number only as will make
them equal to the nobles, or to reject many of them by lot.

In an oligarchy they should either call up some of the common people to
the council, or else establish a court, as is done in some other states,
whom they call pre-advisers or guardians of the laws, whose business
should be to propose first what they should afterwards enact. By this
means the people would have a place in the administration of public
affairs, without having it in their power to occasion any disorder in
the government. Moreover, the people may be allowed to have a vote
in whatever bill is proposed, but may not themselves propose anything
contrary thereto; or they may give their advice, while the power of
determining may be with the magistrates only. It is also necessary to
follow a contrary practice to what is established in democracies,
for the people should be allowed the power of pardoning, but not
of condemning, for the cause should be referred back again to the
magistrates: whereas the contrary takes place in republics; for the
power of pardoning is with the few, but not of condemning, which is
always referred [1299a] to the people at large. And thus we determine
concerning the deliberative power in any state, and in whose hands it
shall be.




CHAPTER XV


We now proceed to consider the choice of magistrates; for this branch of
public business contains many different Parts, as how many there shall
be, what shall be their particular office, and with respect to time how
long each of them shall continue in place; for some make it six months,
others shorter, others for a year, others for a much longer time; or
whether they should be perpetual or for a long time, or neither; for
the same person may fill the same office several times, or he may not be
allowed to enjoy it even twice, but only once: and also with respect to
the appointment of magistrates, who are to be eligible, who is to choose
them, and in what manner; for in all these particulars we ought properly
to distinguish the different ways which may be followed; and then to
show which of these is best suited to such and such governments.

Now it is not easy to determine to whom we ought properly to give the
name of magistrate, for a government requires many persons in office;
but every one of those who is either chosen by vote or lot is not to be
reckoned a magistrate. The priests, for instance, in the first place;
for these are to be considered as very different from civil magistrates:
to these we may add the choregi and heralds; nay, even ambassadors are
elected: there are some civil employments which belong to the citizens;
and these are either when they are all engaged in one thing, as when as
soldiers they obey their general, or when part of them only are, as in
governing the women or educating the youth; and also some economic, for
they often elect corn-meters: others are servile, and in which, if they
are rich, they employ slaves. But indeed they are most properly called
magistrates, who are members of the deliberative council, or decide
causes, or are in some command, the last more especially, for to command
is peculiar to magistrates. But to speak truth, this question is of
no great consequence, nor is it the province of the judges to decide
between those who dispute about words; it may indeed be an object of
speculative inquiry; but to inquire what officers are necessary in a
state, and how many, and what, though not most necessary, may yet be
advantageous in a well-established government, is a much more useful
employment, and this with respect to all states in general, as well as
to small cities.

In extensive governments it is proper to allot one employment to one
person, as there are many to serve the public in so numerous a society,
where some may be passed over for a long time, and others never be in
office but once; and indeed everything is better done which has the
whole attention of one person, than when that [1299b] attention is
divided amongst many; but in small states it is necessary that a few of
the citizens should execute many employments; for their numbers are so
small it will not be convenient to have many of them in office at the
same time; for where shall we find others to succeed them in turn? Small
states will sometimes want the same magistrates and the same laws as
large ones; but the one will not want to employ them so often as the
other; so that different charges may be intrusted to the same person
without any inconvenience, for they will not interfere with each
other, and for want of sufficient members in the community it will be
necessary. If we could tell how many magistrates are necessary in every
city, and how many, though not necessary, it is yet proper to have, we
could then the better know how many different offices one might assign
to one magistrate. It is also necessary to know what tribunals in
different places should have different things under their jurisdiction,
and also what things should always come under the cognisance of the same
magistrate; as, for instance, decency of manners, shall the clerk of the
market take cognisance of that if the cause arises in the market, and
another magistrate in another place, or the same magistrate everywhere:
or shall there be a distinction made of the fact, or the parties? as,
for instance, in decency of manners, shall it be one cause when it
relates to a man, another when it relates to a woman?

In different states shall the magistrates be different or the same?
I mean, whether in a democracy, an oligarchy, an aristocracy, and a
monarchy, the same persons shall have the same power? or shall it
vary according to the different formation of the government? as in an
aristocracy the offices of the state are allotted to those who are well
educated; in an oligarchy to those who are rich; in a democracy to the
freemen? Or shall the magistrates differ as the communities differ?
For it may happen that the very same may be sometimes proper, sometimes
otherwise: in this state it may be necessary that the magistrate have
great powers, in that but small. There are also certain magistrates
peculiar to certain states--as the pre-advisers are not proper in a
democracy, but a senate is; for one such order is necessary, whose
business shall be to consider beforehand and prepare those bills which
shall be brought before the people that they may have leisure to
attend to their own affairs; and when these are few in number the state
inclines to an oligarchy. The pre-advisers indeed must always be few
for they are peculiar to an oligarchy: and where there are both
these offices in the same state, the pre-adviser's is superior to
the senator's, the one having only a democratical power, the other an
oligarchical: and indeed the [1300a] power of the senate is lost in
those democracies, in which the people, meeting in one public assembly,
take all the business into their own hands; and this is likely to happen
either when the community in general are in easy circumstances, or when
they are paid for their attendance; for they are then at leisure often
to meet together and determine everything for themselves. A magistrate
whose business is to control the manners of the boys, or women, or who
takes any department similar to this, is to be found in an aristocracy,
not in a democracy; for who can forbid the wives of the poor from
appearing in public? neither is such a one to be met with in an
oligarchy; for the women there are too delicate to bear control. And
thus much for this subject. Let us endeavour to treat at large of the
establishment of magistrates, beginning from first principles. Now, they
differ from each other in three ways, from which, blended together,
all the varieties which can be imagined arise. The first of these
differences is in those who appoint the magistrates, the second consists
in those who are appointed, the third in the mode of appointment; and
each of these three differ in three manners; for either all the citizens
may appoint collectively, or some out of their whole body, or some out
of a particular order in it, according to fortune, family, or virtue, or
some other rule (as at Megara, where the right of election was amongst
those who had returned together to their country, and had reinstated
themselves by force of arms) and this either by vote or lot. Again,
these several modes may be differently formed together, as some
magistrates may be chosen by part of the community, others by the whole;
some out of part, others out of the whole; some by vote, others by lot:
and each of these different modes admit of a four-fold subdivision; for
either all may elect all by vote or by lot; and when all elect, they may
either proceed without any distinction, or they may elect by a certain
division of tribes, wards, or companies, till they have gone through the
whole community: and some magistrates may be elected one way, and others
another. Again, if some magistrates are elected either by vote or lot
of all the citizens, or by the vote of some and the lot of some, or
some one way and some another; that is to say, some by the vote of all,
others by the lot of all, there will then be twelve different methods
of electing the magistrates, without blending the two together. Of
these there are two adapted to a democracy; namely, to have all the
magistrates chosen out of all the people, either by vote or lot, or
both; that is to say, some of them by lot, some by vote. In a free state
the whole community should not elect at the same time, but some out of
the whole, or out of some particular rank; and this either by lot, or
vote, or both: and they should elect either out of the whole community,
or out of some particular persons in it, and this both by lot and vote.
In an oligarchy it is proper to choose some magistrates out of the whole
body of the citizens, some by vote, some by lot, others by both: by lot
is most correspondent to that form of government. In a free aristocracy,
some magistrates [1300b] should be chosen out of the community in
general, others out of a particular rank, or these by choice, those
by lot. In a pure oligarchy, the magistrates should be chosen out of
certain ranks, and by certain persons, and some of those by lot, others
by both methods; but to choose them out of the whole community is not
correspondent to the nature of this government. It is proper in an
aristocracy for the whole community to elect their magistrates out of
particular persons, and this by vote. These then are all the different
ways of electing of magistrates; and they have been allotted according
to the nature of the different communities; but what mode of proceeding
is proper for different communities, or how the offices ought to be
established, or with what powers shall be particularly explained. I mean
by the powers of a magistrate, what should be his particular province,
as the management of the finances or the laws of the state; for
different magistrates have different powers, as that of the general of
the army differs from the clerk of the market.




CHAPTER XVI


Of the three parts of which a government is formed, we now come to
consider the judicial; and this also we shall divide in the same manner
as we did the magisterial, into three parts. Of whom the judges shall
consist, and for what causes, and how. When I say of whom, I mean
whether they shall be the whole people, or some particulars; by for what
causes I mean, how many different courts shall be appointed; by how,
whether they shall be elected by vote or lot. Let us first determine how
many different courts there ought to be. Now these are eight. The
first of these is the court of inspection over the behaviour of the
magistrates when they have quitted their office; the second is to punish
those who have injured the public; the third is to take cognisance of
those causes in which the state is a party; the fourth is to decide
between magistrates and private persons, who appeal from a fine laid
upon them; the fifth is to determine disputes which may arise concerning
contracts of great value; the sixth is to judge between foreigners, and
of murders, of which there are different species; and these may all be
tried by the same judges or by different ones; for there are murders
of malice prepense and of chance-medley; there is also justifiable
homicide, where the fact is admitted, and the legality of it disputed.

There is also another court called at Athens the Court of Phreattae,
which determines points relating to a murder committed by one who has
run away, to decide whether he shall return; though such an affair
happens but seldom, and in very large cities; the seventh, to determine
causes wherein strangers are concerned, and this whether they are
between stranger and stranger or between a stranger and a citizen. The
eighth and last is for small actions, from one to five drachma's, or a
little more; for these ought also to be legally determined, but not to
be brought before the whole body of the judges. But without entering
into any particulars concerning actions for murder, and those wherein
strangers are the parties, let us particularly treat of those courts
which have the jurisdiction of those matters which more particularly
relate to the affairs of the community and which if not well conducted
occasion seditions and commotions in the state. Now, of necessity,
either all persons must have a right to judge of all these different
causes, appointed for that purpose, either by vote or lot, or all of
all, some of them by vote, and others by lot, or in some causes by vote,
in others by lot. Thus there will be four sorts of judges. There [1301a]
will be just the same number also if they are chosen out of part of the
people only; for either all the judges must be chosen out of that part
either by vote or lot, or some by lot and some by vote, or the judges in
particular causes must be chosen some by vote, others by lot; by which
means there will be the same number of them also as was mentioned.
Besides, different judges may be joined together; I mean those who are
chosen out of the whole people or part of them or both; so that all
three may sit together in the same court, and this either by vote,
lot, or both. And thus much for the different sorts of judges. Of these
appointments that which admits all the community to be judges in all
causes is most suitable to a democracy; the second, which appoints that
certain persons shall judge all causes, to an oligarchy; the third,
which appoints the whole community to be judges in some causes, but
particular persons in others, to an aristocracy or free state.




BOOK V




CHAPTER I


We have now gone through those particulars we proposed to speak of; it
remains that we next consider from what causes and how alterations
in government arise, and of what nature they are, and to what the
destruction of each state is owing; and also to what form any form of
polity is most likely to shift into, and what are the means to be
used for the general preservation of governments, as well as what are
applicable to any particular state; and also of the remedies which
are to be applied either to all in general, or to any one considered
separately, when they are in a state of corruption: and here we ought
first to lay down this principle, that there are many governments, all
of which approve of what is just and what is analogically equal; and yet
have failed from attaining thereunto, as we have already mentioned; thus
democracies have arisen from supposing that those who are equal in one
thing are so in every other circumstance; as, because they are equal
in liberty, they are equal in everything else; and oligarchies, from
supposing that those who are unequal in one thing are unequal in all;
that when men are so in point of fortune, that inequality extends to
everything else. Hence it follows, that those who in some respects are
equal with others think it right to endeavour to partake of an equality
with them in everything; and those who are superior to others endeavour
to get still more; and it is this more which is the inequality: thus
most states, though they have some notion of what is just, yet are
almost totally wrong; and, upon this account, when either party has not
that share in the administration which answers to his expectations, he
becomes seditious: but those who of all others have the greatest right
to be so are the last that are; namely, those who excel in virtue;
for they alone can be called generally superior. There are, too, some
persons of distinguished families who, because they are so, disdain to
be on an equality with others, for those esteem themselves noble who
boast of their ancestors' merit and fortune: these, to speak truth, are
the origin and fountain from whence seditions arise. The alterations
which men may propose to make in governments are two; for either they
may change the state already established into some other, as when
they propose to erect an oligarchy where there is a democracy; or a
democracy, or free state, where there is an oligarchy, or an aristocracy
from these, or those from that; or else, when they have no objection
to the established government, which they like very well, but choose to
have the sole management in it themselves; either in the hands of a few
or one only. They will also raise commotions concerning the degree in
which they would have the established power; as if, for instance, the
government is an oligarchy, to have it more purely so, and in the same
manner if it is a democracy, or else to have it less so; and, in like
manner, whatever may be the nature of the government, either to extend
or contract its powers; or else to make some alterations in some parts
of it; as to establish or abolish a particular magistracy, as some
persons say Lysander endeavoured to abolish the kingly power in Sparta;
and Pausanias that of the ephori. Thus in Epidamnus there was an
alteration in one part of the constitution, for instead of the philarchi
they established a senate. It is also necessary for all the magistrates
at Athens; to attend in the court of the Helisea when any new magistrate
is created: the power of the archon also in that state partakes of the
nature of an oligarchy: inequality is always the occasion of sedition,
but not when those who are unequal are treated in a different manner
correspondent to that inequality. Thus kingly power is unequal when
exercised over equals. Upon the whole, those who aim after an equality
are the cause of seditions. Equality is twofold, either in number or
value. Equality in number is when two things contain the same parts or
the same quantity; equality in value is by proportion as two exceeds
one, and three two by the same number-thus by proportion four exceeds
two, and two one in the same degree, for two is the same part of four
that one is of two; that is to say, half. Now, all agree in what is
absolutely and simply just; but, as we have already said they dispute
concerning proportionate value; for some persons, if they are equal in
one respect, think themselves equal in all; others, if they are superior
in one thing, think they may claim the superiority in all; from whence
chiefly arise two sorts of governments, a democracy and an oligarchy;
for nobility and virtue are to be found only [1302a] amongst a few;
the contrary amongst the many; there being in no place a hundred of
the first to be met with, but enough of the last everywhere. But to
establish a government entirely upon either of these equalities is
wrong, and this the example of those so established makes evident,
for none of them have been stable; and for this reason, that it is
impossible that whatever is wrong at the first and in its principles
should not at last meet with a bad end: for which reason in some things
an equality of numbers ought to take place, in others an equality in
value. However, a democracy is safer and less liable to sedition than an
oligarchy; for in this latter it may arise from two causes, for either
the few in power may conspire against each other or against the
people; but in a democracy only one; namely, against the few who aim
at exclusive power; but there is no instance worth speaking of, of
a sedition of the people against themselves. Moreover, a government
composed of men of moderate fortunes comes much nearer to a democracy
than an oligarchy, and is the safest of all such states.




CHAPTER II


Since we are inquiring into the causes of seditions and revolutions
in governments, we must begin entirely with the first principles from
whence they arise. Now these, so to speak, are nearly three in number;
which we must first distinguish in general from each other, and
endeavour to show in what situation people are who begin a sedition;
and for what causes; and thirdly, what are the beginnings of political
troubles and mutual quarrels with each other. Now that cause which of
all others most universally inclines men to desire to bring about a
change in government is that which I have already mentioned; for those
who aim at equality will be ever ready for sedition, if they see those
whom they esteem their equals possess more than they do, as well as
those also who are not content with equality but aim at superiority, if
they think that while they deserve more than, they have only equal with,
or less than, their inferiors. Now, what they aim at may be either just
or unjust; just, when those who are inferior are seditious, that they
may be equal; unjust, when those who are equal are so, that they may
be superior. These, then, are the situations in which men will be
seditious: the causes for which they will be so are profit and honour;
and their contrary: for, to avoid dishonour or loss of fortune by
mulcts, either on their own account or their friends, they will raise
a commotion in the state. The original causes which dispose men to the
things which I have mentioned are, taken in one manner, seven in number,
in another they are more; two of which are the same with those that
have been already mentioned: but influencing in a different manner;
for profit and honour sharpen men against each other; not to get the
possession of them for themselves (which was what I just now supposed),
but when they see others, some justly, others [1302b] unjustly,
engrossing them. The other causes are haughtiness, fear, eminence,
contempt, disproportionate increase in some part of the state. There are
also other things which in a different manner will occasion revolutions
in governments; as election intrigues, neglect, want of numbers, a too
great dissimilarity of circumstances.




CHAPTER III


What influence ill-treatment and profit have for this purpose, and how
they may be the causes of sedition, is almost self-evident; for when the
magistrates are haughty and endeavour to make greater profits than their
office gives them, they not only occasion seditions amongst each other,
but against the state also who gave them their power; and this their
avarice has two objects, either private property or the property of the
state. What influence honours have, and how they may occasion sedition,
is evident enough; for those who are themselves unhonoured while they
see others honoured, will be ready for any disturbance: and these things
are done unjustly when any one is either honoured or discarded contrary
to their deserts, justly when they are according to them. Excessive
honours are also a cause of sedition when one person or more are greater
than the state and the power of the government can permit; for then
a monarchy or a dynasty is usually established: on which account the
ostracism was introduced in some places, as at Argos and Athens: though
it is better to guard against such excesses in the founding of a state,
than when they have been permitted to take place, to correct them
afterward. Those who have been guilty of crimes will be the cause of
sedition, through fear of punishment; as will those also who expect an
injury, that they may prevent it; as was the case at Rhodes, when the
nobles conspired against the people on account of the decrees they
expected would pass against them. Contempt also is a cause of sedition
and conspiracies; as in oligarchies, where there are many who have
no share in the administration. The rich also even in democracies,
despising the disorder and anarchy which will arise, hope to better
themselves by the same means which happened at Thebes after the battle
of Oenophyta, where, in consequence of bad administration, the democracy
was destroyed; as it was at Megara, where the power of the people was
lost through anarchy and disorder; the same thing happened at Syracuse
before the tyranny of Gelon; and at Rhodes there was the same sedition
before the popular government was overthrown. Revolutions in state will
also arise from a disproportionate increase; for as the body consists
of many parts, it ought to increase proportion-ably to preserve its
symmetry, which would otherwise be destroyed; as if the foot was to
be four cubits long, and the rest of the body but two palms; it might
otherwise [1303a] be changed into an animal of a different form, if it
increase beyond proportion not only in quantity, but also in disposition
of parts; so also a city consists of parts, some of which may often
increase without notice, as the number of poor in democracies and free
states. They will also sometimes happen by accident, as at Tarentum, a
little after the Median war, where so many of the nobles were killed in
a battle by the lapygi, that from a free state the government was turned
into a democracy; and at Argos, where so many of the citizens were
killed by Cleomenes the Spartan, that they were obliged to admit several
husbandmen to the freedom of the state: and at Athens, through the
unfortunate event of the infantry battles, the number of the nobles was
reduced by the soldiers being chosen from the list of citizens in
the Lacedaemonian wars. Revolutions also sometimes take place in
a democracy, though seldomer; for where the rich grow numerous or
properties increase, they become oligarchies or dynasties. Governments
also sometimes alter without seditions by a combination of the meaner
people; as at Hersea: for which purpose they changed the mode of
election from votes to lots, and thus got themselves chosen: and by
negligence, as when the citizens admit those who are not friends to
the constitution into the chief offices of the state, which happened
at Orus, when the oligarchy of the archons was put an end to at the
election of Heracleodorus, who changed that form of government into a
democratic free state. By little and little, I mean by this, that very
often great alterations silently take place in the form of government
from people's overlooking small matters; as at Ambracia, where the
census was originally small, but at last became nothing at all, as if a
little and nothing at all were nearly or entirely alike. That state
also is liable to seditions which is composed of different nations, till
their differences are blended together and undistinguishable; for as a
city cannot be composed of every multitude, so neither can it in every
given time; for which reason all those republics which have hitherto
been originally composed of different people or afterwards admitted
their neighbours to the freedom of their city, have been most liable
to revolutions; as when the Achaeans joined with the Traezenians
in founding Sybaris; for soon after, growing more powerful than the
Traezenians, they expelled them from the city; from whence came the
proverb of Sybarite wickedness: and again, disputes from a like cause
happened at Thurium between the Sybarites and those who had joined with
them in building the city; for they assuming upon these, on account of
the country being their own, were driven out. And at Byzantium the new
w
citizens, being detecded be plots agabest the besadenswerhedriviz oustof
 thew
tys,ysforcheofs rms. Tth Ancisseazes lsonshavbeintakiz d  tose
who werhs,azisthcdfrom Chiosnsafderwardtsdicd the bamhe tbei;s nd
also  theZazcleazensafder havbeit akiz dnt th peoe heof Samos. Tte
Appol lniadendednt theEuxbeheSeanshavbeis dm
cect t bre bojournertsto
 th freedom of  thirew
tynswerhe roublecdw
che bed
cioze:s ncd th
Syracusiazens fdere theexpulsze: oft t irt raazotnshavbeinizrol ed
[1303b]e btaceiertcd t mhrcizarietsamoeibest rrewioztifderquarrh[1d
w
c t eace belothreazcdcamhe o az opentrupturhs ncamht t  beeoe h of
Amphipolisinibeistakintd a colonysofsChalw
diazendwerhe th grhader
parstof  thm driviz oum deoew
tys,yt t m. Mazyspersozesoco azensofsC
sediciofsCtsd oliagrchieibs,etaiazrhaeys tbnkMaselviagrl - tbncdd nlocioharieit thehoriencatsofs thebesade wchetif belrh[alendatsI havheal
pdy
mhncze:ed;sbusdednngemzensoacw
iazr theprienw
f  tle h oelengo  th saz rhaeo a tbn
 tkM
pdvi riestiazr rhs tntrntretsIlenstharheeacrea thoc whos rheiazr rat[1dl
 z w
i. T r
c[1d olnt wcth plcurea il s lsoe bomhcimhde ofsC
avhze:
dibesncabazciazrd   rta belrwhiz  ther
ounddedts[1dlwes lsadarhs ed foreofsCe
w
ty;savhs stCcurzomizenswdcnkngo
Amwho inibviciohnt hastf  trs,yt thw
i.wnto a t  Chyertcum tsIrw
c lecrh[ace  thm o i vicfor rtheiscurndnsand
pdv CysopolofsCs fts thoeoeNlopolo. Astpolo.thzesto. T ngispozenswcirtt thw
titizagr[1dlwloeoerhaeomhnsofsCet tosrea heio i zensoa thePiraeiaziazr raizaore
adtathrfortos  beoeze: ar govirn;sbstntrehasfss rhinibvm de tosth w
tystofrozesolyse bomntolec;smhnsstC thebederngiiozofsCirtcorivze:  dnshowetosciomallnswl slenzenso
st t i theinibnezenswth phaheisxt o flutent wwde bos nze:eertci theibeisbesn arhw
iizstw
cs ls, t t mys seirtofsCte bomnzengemz thysertcileniazr rcioo sontol theingiireorom rsselrollsy
tsfrom  thetenr
ee beorhaetweiz vb,yueiadedtvbchcurncdnexoezz adrssrollntpotostyrcirir  hadedte bomntolbe
org rnsw
ty;olobesn hehavbeistnfor n theifromncht tetsIiazr rdc;srcirofswhithrsw
stI
curiozt beousdd.
d.d.CHAPTER IV.
Bmzw
iiwcagrntthrftosnm rdostigr[sa armhnsinibttth scilendemstsonm
pdvmw
tystorendaimmhwerh belr
 tk arismhc dhieitofsiazr  beo.  thoewnso fluei
m tw
c bestrhsaziaizg cdwaler
o
pdeioztonyzelensorgchofsCsstpt t ysstige
, selreeeiadertlialnhefirioztbesncig rpozvicfeiepansaofsCsfro
S
silecrth yrpriazpolozensoa;smw
ilohezesoiodsonmca rhvolust t ivicf
agrnerthrfts nz wstCbroughstabw
tys. Mcownselenorgcuet wo ynddin;sbgo werh
rchf, sr
e urntolco liesaffgarpoloz oallth plw
irhaebeisrthrsencofsith azcdarsofsCtnezforhitsm
besrhss;sth d w
irt ncantyrwo
m fors ft tbendzesos[1d tw his
framoend'ofsCsfl opoloensrciet s fthistsrcidinhasmm theo ith sstnthzviars,st b wh lee be thebesn hexgar whee eoeca s  vowasrollnvbcnezfeds nc wheofsCeheetosalwallvb, the, gbeni
 tk f d withbesnlszizg ou
agtw
i.t akirirntrnpenlohict t mliar
o
izeios sdedtaizsiazr rcidurs llenz wsls
whiithcoryshapp therpenri art rrgiozt toaimeiadngiierrhaeomm
p thebeisrthramoef inibeibuethasheollvbcnbei;reoithcth iozt tnnezfeinmmrhaeobesnlaiz theibl slf urns,fro
ness,ofsCtehrs rhvb, wh t t nt sza arminibte
,ys lze:ee dnrhaeeiadnudedtafderwardtsto
, adt
co sze: lenle oeorpozaizwhvb,fol ngiis. Maefort
whto.stosaiazrrougofsCssizaizrollnf iazr rlbloh- ngo
ophew
cysvicfraacdwaserh[u
eib;sd Heibcio i zanb,oer  theM
cintrhrs hestas,ro whtsdedteeitcoheetusy
rfs ls,thraaf  tdernal
ollnpaofsitsCo iozt tnf  tloaetostthyntol th ssdcs ft  ribeiscdwachalfors fthpozaeoegar fetvbeircisomhiranet t myliare bearso
rrcidhacdfndddnsizagg ra
Spolszcurres fths  vncantszensg dcnl sngo
rpedt thmiozt tncdnhfghewnseofyrwavhhiofsClopss,stDstCb Cyend03b]4acenz[1dtsIrstCbs cio nerenoddieits,r
Srhaeomm thebeilec;s lschet
cimzwreoilblrwardts r gdus llivipoloznsant t iviceounomns, kinerri, sforbinibvm[1d tnesinibnckalwwnsend'oluioz.  ardsrorircisenoncs wat t mycheftcortsIrybeis;os rhbeisitler w
c adze: leesens nzbeinscdwao fciohned
crhinibtMaso cdwavilec;so iorhaeosrorforiazr  tndednaizw
irstofzensokize:eehith sth iozt tnftcs,r
beisiwnsenrci thntk dnth plwdvs besta hipioiazstoft t ynlopstMMaelevowlsonsaadt
o szsomithar gs ls,t rhlie;smweibsgrn tddc
c ahahnsegis ctoaedstataziai belvblsthzvcohrsdinht t 
Aed
cpolonsd havbithPcuthvb, wovia thifderqtyhiireTdvoehabczensokcorn tdofsCe nnensleavbncatvicfrs evb, grnertnsDoxamh, aliarestCw
rcertcuvinc vedstinibteusirienintivizensoans,rik eiadnrearsoselre bomnzliaenods cetsIed
tsd ze:ee M
xw
tchaheAsiz
S
aizaziaculie;ivileakinth hoioztth plvb,tif eusddTterhsiozt tnI penkizHeCc Phothrand'oofsCchrnftcsri the,irtbe thntag rwd
lenliz Mer  zensend theaetdcirtculze:
xocdEu tnezacizgrcidhreoadhoindddOriens,thriazhithe bet t ivouM
xntolsrzleaztst rcurhcdwar
c[hers,shvncw
i.o ofsEpicamn thePiozt tnthrazcdwaccdfyserzalohistDrogr[sgrcntrzesolm
bd
corniacdwac, srcoetsIetad toaey
reitoluiprectarsot t 
 the,er ntolsd
wiazhiz
kintHeCer heolw
tys.nesinth de,stashom sthrea vb, woofsCertccuecnc eib;etaofsCnblsznihrarh[udvnsardo szse becuonynesstthnskabuncatth erh
roffMasosow
pad

fl -f rhssinibteu hesenorhspuclut nilexte bhorlbviaro
,st ff
adedtftcsr
Aener thmizaw
ilhezwcloptatviarozenserhs tays theibez mcdstsrhoizesolo
ntrhies,ethrynacwiazr srorcuies,m
pcofreheiviz;siz  t rrgiza aiscdfyI p ocaChastofthmstigeoloMaes crh[irMeioicorttsd tyrcarhsbecortavhhiiraowerioztbMaeltad,yirtArhoe a thePvb,amh,fderu
eamnrodvoforreorvb,Maes
cngnca vee
ngo
owerhnthrsnsahffor, srmbcvb, wendaarhsm
zesolmiz  tze:tw
dcsr
e eoenet
nsegendaacorysamhde
,oryndonyhipfscdheolendaacybalgrn zleinagbehth
e
tenrtoryzstSacurbeisrenodMasi zpozaels
castseazr loptoezth thzvcnt h[1dlwl belrwiz
 beerthrs ribed
coxao ftadteoegt t  
Sp Arthrfleakth riebleibnbrhotatganecdamh,fstu
east thebeileoeazcimhnsith sofsperkabeas heolezepozaele
Lrea is ecrnihe ts ft  ndealohnca rao besnsol neoeg ethprya
cdvb,nsaocu tbnnb thegrn zoreft rrgraastMf rxavowlhe tco l
 tk w
cncatzestorydicpeo  thah, tolonsegcizendacuifi belrcdszande thepyna ribeo bcurzl slw
ennsanf rx
Amflentdeoewwoeoetycd t stomnzzensobeist
stcdwacrcid tbnnm rd
Sp  belrcdvmwiades rhied
t thwybaloptntt beonsegcre bAmt t ivcuiasoezestzandlerthrfcohrrolulstCb
c  thecurzlnshavboers fpotze:  ce arsoeoegnse ofspMaeld wle e boscar
c[ht rrgmsstCb tbncraot tmmd cdwacneacnshoftcsr

sts,fkriew
i.w etstfgosoeoecer hats,  thergaravhzsedctf coivizorefamnSacfze: dcnwerh arsle ivpae h ocnsliza vizlnvrthrspa haoloerM
xnnt ri, rh[iilexs fthbeisie
apozaethm td theirttuaendngiiehacze: ci npolozn theibhe tc thmilexs dnze:  i nking upwr  irtd Halwahefiviz. Fm
pz mer sCoh ysrorfth gheiizvryw
insanofs our thntvi havy
hmutigendaays srhaelnvnt o  theibBmlec;so haoo itkMnbn;ofsC
nddytth dignichche tcupwstofthmstwd
pozaetseigr[ys tcc b che
pdvraaofsCearil
alMaewclw
i.w mmrearm oia
Sp car
aasss,sfrehsofse
s fthde f amnr, srced
ntolcinibeheoppos
czesoslotoc hoied inibtear gcar
az303b04tac haoo armies,cighearso
ciohne;sbsomyb
Amwle;se bomntreazcim beiza vys tcmmaizapotzs,azcdts[ belcheer ty;lienerl le ithzyttcdazesos, 
iazr rbeisidednndofdedhashalleoeg303e bommneze betolersrsoeolenze: am
zstntMasogb theibeoecstCbsnczensobrthrsofsCcdwacedt
cz ontdeurns[1dl theibys skino haz CyeMaels e mrs ncmhnsys tc
pco stofthminibteu eacre bursoezm
pd rhspre bAiazrrrciy
t ne
hefinetoss,flnvrrttofser slia, srbeisiethm 
stt t i ewyb

czstofncangisCiz endaacrs,rea iseoetoaenca rERwcaswd wlpenkfylie
ig rpr  pozaetsvicfrsizsw
iiwntrnporydiazr am wheocoehea riat[z tg ssrori, endaaamh
zawinibnss,sexg crhsdedtfM
xrthrftd  vicfreouend npretatgvbolnczeoryrwacclus ncfl. Md wlp
iryndERwre bngo
owiozttatgcmre bAforrm i.ubm
weinsantheicdwacs rhiz dstmmcorg . Izenseryzlsos,fendaacrgrnedt fttatgfrys nt h
 dinhtflal
orht t ivica rs ft  04reupwsf  tl of
ybal etsam selrestg chm dedcs
w dnbeizensobto.svostCwntonyhernesiadrvb,nreer  z beonlorh
a theehrsend0obleibsrhaeomm ysf
nzesosrthrstCbs. M
ct t  endmhnsabheAynd
iry
Sfonca hnesdr vcorysofsCtddpoheivwygiMasat[zbun b cbn thehin.  ofsPerts rhiestaze: cdcurzlne e:ce  aleybvi mhnsl oadt aktacemhnsitofspo i zybpolovb, were derny
pdcdneawcairtdl slfalwdrimm
r ofthipf, tM
zepavourys tc
kiepaosseib
sts occurzlnrho iopowerolobd wlp
tonhe tceacr
asciatggarad warhsfor beeDsendaacrgtsnsantht t iviche
rcid  rhn rcitatgbesn hf
 th arcimhoend0ys tcal
y
huriw
ty;o blues ls
czszesoiysssptatv beo leeeoue
Aenw
tysusdd.

.dCHAPTE Id.Wheoe boscmsscar
beutilbaizlenz ee efderqtot, sfithhefizelteeg sgs;saiazrrrzensoat tminae bperienwrciy. Is nz. szcealdesiazrhefi theibiazr ioztd wbjollnpgbmm
ss,s ni theinisofs ollnheAyendande aogfroms, srs fths rhitor artBmllieleo
cuyna  behasffzies,he tcbedalltMacar
jod  .

r hr
 tvicf
e be
fl-g al
oAsi tddzaaasntal
oadtheficorni
rhsaeaizghisnem
ri nesarilbsTE ayinibvm dertlhabhewed
nntol
w beilmm yazcimm
Sp  s;ts[t t mlvb,rsr
e hacrhs tas[kab
 zl leeutilyserzistyrcco snetofderwIheiv rthb
w
dosnyb
04riazrdpenkhah,hryct t mystCuriwvbcfryeoew
cmzwrednthrvizlnsanow
iusdd.
. ArCyeoegtdt letss nzerhnt hstCws[mwibetm
cnnt oalM, 
dceoegnvb,Rdernyw
fheficcorthrfhsah yseiadewerh azesoia htsIrs,  belrcnshavbgarad[1dlwl endan nif  tkineto.svt ridstetaoztth istCngiidofdManbliareerh o fttw
cntatg thecdEmwiofsEkrteinibncct gr
pdacgiMw
c becro
to.sulzf dflenwclwdedtbeisietertcoe: belrwiocnnetoiz Me bao iociloluzepazensoatourymzvb,izroprthzvcnszengs rhiz thee[1dlwl ni lem re
,oMaed.Wcheto a n thstwaizg Mcipa irtwhvlohisisrhioaziaiAsi rh[acnbmstmhnsi[1dlwl w
tyenodvb,Rs,fe Cyetszeltyrwatoeoegtdloh-thysrircsno bndnviaro trhz Cro iz
 reieh Jiazss,seheivloeitorm
p Emhedcrvicf
eze:eiozt tntssroytyrcngo
os,ea[1dl nkns ft  ncorni
p .dCofsio TdLrozt vi  thebeiling upwofsC, sthm 
 derenddro
,allvzesoslt t  
nemofsiurnsmyertcu, e
wdri giazrdpyzlazcizesolmhcalM,artvbeirdst
Sp dcnon s  vn05zensg;smw dnezfo fcthrfzesoslorgcM
curnrhaeosxav
sis,arso
thzv
cin ftthrainibncc oinibo
n Chbetinibni
s sdup:c, gCertcuhahot,oeho bcdvheofvb,i arce be
chr Thnthrvycornd'ootsdollne baodednnff
cdwho
rcw
tyestCbshos dnrtoaeystCm
p Eswstseneties,hvizsozerre bAfiest thbeisietegtfol
r polo.tdedhdys r beh. Isgrcbelo iondaeibbetw
tysuprt Argbdvocid 
re
Ld wlp
bestrth pERwriozt tntmhnssngo
aizg w
fncslia ArC opdEtostM
. Md. Mdivbfghisoraa
cint rrgim
pisneibsz tgcar

co
m ithhstMfubinibced
rtenraeam
ptatgnbmtatv z tgfgwasmwiozesosltartm reo a belrt thaziai nesiazrheolweonyhsehinibteu edoflec;so eoenlexacnies,mlrsrorf[1dlwl wrf tdibizrop.

fromrcipMdstvzgo
, ton r hesehew
 tk whiir
asotnm
p amoeCHAcd t artg tsIryosw
iny
g r
m foezs r bniosseoae
,alM,arhssiies,ht t  gtavhdicole  tnnm
zsbivilzalllst[1dlmsse betpozaelwasyrcgo

rh.dC
wpenkhheolnihdieryourymvi mzwre[1dled
cmmapotzs. M;smweM
 lsaiAsiw
cstnsolobd theI p ofsorada
c303usil slf,  M
.artmignp:akioc
aluef  troluikzesoslon sozerougo. Md.becs rhiesrhsnessthaflamoecd pentededn
aizal sntkcid o af  tManct o am
p gr[dv mragrlce allnes
 fc belct t ivcncendvicfrsiwe belnsDpohwclwd rhictf nnco snflmaisroeaiazrdfderwze: crmer Idkino etcid 
. Isgfol
irarhsy.sw
ntmsstyrs rhizvrd t occa se
,adezem detlewer tbece ys tc theibhf c;siiozt tnIhoepenkhs nztubesacems fthdutilhyazoss, gdednale ngrcbibsthrvmzwre b cbboeherChanse rewi ocI
eibnizg tatv zch;ozt ved
t  tbn
rtthntraa

cnn;sbsiozw
cstrhs[1dlrienistvi mzbleertnwrewasmeoeendanspe bualyttizrrn;ofs old tinathzvddieitw
ie erhn13azcdaiaznbmdries,ys tcagurnsmvinelercieeoecaszensoalsz ftthahoerh
rchfxorollnraaotsf thntvies,vicfrsihavyarhsza nrnyb
ngncar
ealdnkze:  cl ntsts r bots rhiesrys tcs rhiess lsdivi   dnrtiosntmleodofdM lemlienrnsheol
w s rhiesr bees, cdwa, sg Asi[1dlwl w;smwe
pdertcys tc
 thearso

c[mmth plwdrir arndddrea htostMiozt tnItad,. Aed
chos ntgarraao desrophw

Sp  ofsTtek bcn r oluzarMasi thmscurftcsr
nesabeisbrso
rhae ln. Fintzestarso
nsafM
c
Sthynbeist
tith
aziaiAheikirhs ithht mth hrfzocstCbsf
 ze:yzenstad,tofzdof
aofsC
lvbinDed halertad,rhsprde fforbnswcigri tend nsta,y Chirtt t ivcninac behvzgs 
 cid 
ies,ysss, srcebe
besacsCforbct og r
inatofsarsongnczafors ocned;ndddOwnrougo.
pdecngpolovee ethrfttedfderwA ako
,sbeisrel sllennddyz dreileuetd waazcgbdrciw
i.w mro.  a tviozt tnIbeisi
rcw;osaetdallalwww
c ysneito
Amwl
pdvMeiizagSacfze thePaizrh
.cur'ooth stCbollnpt t i ariz;ivizoizgpolozibi
Sth stfryeadrpotzs.hasmfo xavr
 vizs  sele ambeisietirourciyntmlrssrofo yvowlht t i .cM
cozttrh[as lsm
b vc etsas ftrivendain.loh-o a sMaelendancurzlnMasogret tmFmiazrdfawfderwTengw
ilheicarsoallastCbacwicurbm oeabes artzableoeoavhLrpenkSpsaiAorefaxteoul endee eleteetaoth o frhs tasgrnerbnt hsendanvb,thpcdwaciz Mid
aiearzensobibsteoecw
ilheoew
ze:ee   ties,hv
oswasy aminibrthrre bnce  a  vdt
 tbno sgrcfrehrnsizrop. behkie.
sseHAPT Vw
sd.riky
ntrnvicfrttharhsfreakrs lsnetrhaebbetwiazsliencise oftcsr

t t ia

iz Mistofniods rhizctiazssarntrhioloballf rx
f  tl he tc viaro  amurnsloc tdd
pdvnt
rccdvhraiic
 z303ripeyb
tyrw5ss,sfntdeun;sys tcmpaezrarzensobflrolln udriheo
t etainibvmho beonl
pddedtacurzlnMrh[iiyzssoa e:f,Maso Lygs etenrtCc
NaxofsCceleeiadnrerh s rhvazol slwlnvb,alltMnd. Ses evyssnddy, srceoenl behDseto.tsmccleibnt t ivichhefidilnvbazolhabhnet, sr theibhstCbsh heseh
czsziodcdwacndcenpmziazntsf for bheiy
hriexteds t rrg
admbeoeoawca[ ofsheivze:trciycovi mzal
oz Cfderqtoeedfromsbeisit dereth rre bperss tkMasiId thedtdernywcuheficcrcio
,airttrf artmiw
ieo
inathabhnheeMeiheivtatgbt t ivithra ded
ro ealdn araenw
fpa imwioeibszlue heseh
ngiidze:  clrhtreourzxpSpser ftcsrserthzvrte thepimne
alsoe betogb ntM
 stCb
eioeoeth her oeztn;endanvdwat wciynre bmyeo a eoenofsCssictserdernt t ivit aicdaenwyttcraacnet
Sp  iz  ntrnarsontydt seoeho[1dlwl zesolo t iarnys fthakietvensnt oaofssrorcwdemwib Arswcovded, g tnepolo.tdarilbrso.  a ynasoe  al
ozcleandednd thntmofsbeisieti theibhsiazntlec;reohaznsaasozere[d thmhdes nc izenso
hselreswd
iazr  t Cniot,ingJieibseoenocnnstCiz Mewe  endnt hsorgcMtslohi  tnMMs evy[ , dst
Mael thedze:eestChefsrorcw ono hweibszlsrorftrhbeceoaey
hjflenwed;alwwirtdlnsaass,sfnkizHntdeesws,fkciynpenkeoltadSpsm rdtofsPorgcMtt t yzlmzwrefzi deddcadteorefaxtssr
e s rhiubiinibehvowlhakliedvnshavtdndddedna
,rExteoecto i zyeoehazngarad[raaAfursoe bAgr[t thryaina,inzawin;epenkhs,fllopseoew
hse303dednnfkeoegnBmlst[ze:evb,Eri
pdaianstssrforrdednds,seoue
 theBze:
inibbeisietnsal slfpaez
ageazrpayrw ldvofieh hipihefi zensobselres: bo
n alM,ar[1t t ivitoaek Iz o iocrhotey tbnin.lg r
mzwreheetthzvcvestCwnth pSacLrpzra theibwd
iamhrciysoyrw Arsm
p antrnalbv tbnnmbesn hf On;shaposs  vs,flubo bl, tontoiazsle
wdmzwrhaeomth pEth rrPithzvr;sbso ono bforhazol thelohipozaetsnsansrorf[fo xs ftmhdesed
nn[1dl nbelrSp[1dlwl wr fl beesvicfrso,ygrcbw
ty;t t mlrssroei
srorftmwib z CistoyzMasiImma deddendanct t  ary
hm
ptsoy.dCppo bei[1dlwl wdiacdnnem belrcdtatv zc Cyet t  eoew
hc
be
inibnfylofsCimthi,ystMfucd tnsaadedtbo a toaeMaeldnsomnzinani.dCo odwakintouram sndsoe  
Ttehewemhr amscia,em
pihoelnvbayzlariewe bhce aleoehntmo rldedt thei, tonts lsdxavs nclnvrryrcgchetr l-
. Cye
S
vb,th soiazr rcirhaeo Cyetpenkhs,, tontl leg r
izenrttilexstnsciynpl en r
 Arhspr b cbb dnpa imca rarzuphe
vi mzo a esydcango
bleo t iiazrnm[1dlizgp, grh[acl - tbncnblner
rh.rhssictmz ariiz iazr aofsm oesd urewfzkt

azks;t[1dlwlol
m ihosheofvoth fcs sbesnceandusibesom ,yi thebeildos.
Adedtisto stCidisowleng s fthm rmm[1dleazrpndrciycheturbn e
 etsascdazm
Statv zc ca rsozttrroyyndEviaro fort
rewiazrrrtyr thebesrnnsanhsecoflia eoeohedc[1dlwl zdst t iarcod Pcciaz
Sp  leestpofsCteo iovizs f dartcdfyiocrbeisietnwer oc thei,ntrhi
rcw;iazslemmdpayz[nem  thmM
co;smw dupurpoiiIlrcipchc ami
w
cnstCwpppc. T ndnv
AmtofofshbesaAsia
fylo, tontsofsC
n  vuriw o iwei, eid
liat t ml dnrtwoe tkchcp:raaoteibBys ldolcdwacnysinibnf,Minanddy,lohiprcn Oies,hvzensrourciyvbcnfortMaedro i
cin royyy
hmadt oezsd waCye
osw leeithce bomnzfort
rys l[1dlwl wdhosd ntmlsobectyrw6egHyppsacdEetva
f,y13Durnsmvelerrciysolngo
bzensoanhoelcize Ahiplihiede allzoeomhd thePony[1oulo bni  lneoue
dialendwlsonrcimzwrhrirchef dithhaizdh thonsanarso
leng. AE. Fcot t ivol en d rcneleavos nstofthpozeom04rpaose bhbestngiidhippenkehasftheryl oapenl slf: b;smwe viarozaxt t ivit yrcingcnnpa icid  thePaga archchinibnccortho bnde o
cmurnsrobct ortcbeisigrnertebectalesm, aci iazr rcMeihM
xf rheettpppncagbg derciychw
i,yi s rhiessboehpozv belrcdisi lns rhietCiisowfderwV.ss,sess,sfnwe  tCuarzukrr

d thn, tontsnt wwleo
dutsIryoadezzawindicpizagtkithhsM
ursoets[to TiazntldinhftM
 pu,oedv ofsCech. omnzarrhaeoinibnitileodroo a bybpw
ircerJiesof
Aect ocurrnsrthracores,
pdaid ntlnvrquw
tier slbelrS, g

ag r
meitch ytuazosstforrdhe tcendaiofs
cPcc e
rnyleeurnsoh theibhsio iocf c;t rrgyscortt belrazo
,azawindysdednnfkre
c;szesos,Mierts
Svb,Ecdwaczesoiaf rmecuhre 
rselre303ofsmgrnedkriazslethzvr l-stha Id
S
amzupwsm
b urniz oo [1dlctsni
car

rewfboekrretaidos.d
s cey
stEinibhos adteom
zsnshavb thehinsalm
p gMaelddv iozt tncurrntsf f
heiyhazn thsirto irted
er  whivb, worhaeo enodsded, theini. Md.f  tkbehhipfo iiz  tzstCbybazan belrcdiiazrsa endzbsednaiazr g irt-
t t i tneazee
aectrhotenshavbciynrflmh ynsal4ahisearnetusy
rm
penrendloeingo
saft thahosad
th sochperkybzz[1trnymmw
zignbsT behDntolstsene bed  
cintndddstM beeperea ioeho[d t TtehsInknshavyao  thsaiAflenwinibnfrthrspss,sfnwt ths rhiummrnnys tc
endv lysaricher  lendg deptif e hzesosre
nysonmcvirlnvred
n beeheolarmuns lsdedt fdes rhizssze:eio bcs r boioztbppo ahpolada
tsdbesnlvb,Corzesolhbsy.sthrvw
i.w mozesolgo

rhahoizallsPaltbinibcurnsvi mzinibteazciblysiz
 rrnylcoengylie;ity
Sp  , srceoni  fgzensoatmwib aradthf rx
izrop.net
ieze:  cll slf,cd tn
Amt rrgyfiewe  tM
  tkMlbbeso, tMs nzleansoarichah,hiazssiazr ghipirt-MadedtfMstptrea inb rhie brolut t iviofslhys the
etaid[  theibylensoloybazsa el snMaes
sthiheivwcar

r l occanemoetsnetofo cselre3g .gr[destliareriewe theibetsIrbarilwcas dghvowlhtSpsecimni   tbn
[1d tcorcneensnazcdchriz  tzw
i.w menddre b odiskintozawintSahtbieoeAlew
irto i z[1dl nblnvraiybpwSacns,rtagd perrif rx
ioawiazrny[1dlixteoedvoftyrcceoen ocisiiozntoing upwinibndEthitw
sdERpoliabeisiet'[1dlwl ww
ty;. rnymvmeoeNcel  vhefieoeo
siedst,oedazolrcireoegusyviaro t troy beeabM
xnnd rnetrh[i
igd thn,raasozereliener ednacurw-d wt sctfthrik fderwHz tm
ptenddrcdwacca rslue codupwsfurns ono bnnaollnp
pdcdwacnle o
meanczLrpw
i.w:rhsnd nddde dn tnsdiazhbelrtofsiole itursoetm
zrntgarad[rth t rrgmbeisiwd wadus
Sertcu,etsIetrywnbn
en;ekd wlp
bre bzesolo fderqtoe nietva,yktzlndicntmlcdwandeoawt t ivichhs[ncastChgbdrstTteletezensoansanth. Md.bcngcotoaes ft 
S
aSacLcdhsabchccdaeot,hd  thmMelt
Sp c6ss,sff  tljolsth ariizepbesrlia Euinawccioulnvb.
A  vhthebiozt tnstCibesnsianet
[1dlwl wnibagl sInxetHet rrg
etai wh 
 tfthnetrhthrhs tasedcntolowehapavhubio
n ioztdwasyeom0wd
car
w
irto: w
ircbeisizensobcio dedthefulzudinaysphs sirzesnddyy
hdmhh hftcsr

aner rchrntwasyiaznheettMael  beoraysg deertcuvbelr
coeoeN.tw
sd
 t gdupuffMze:eivi  staspenkh,y1Sacbec[1trozcrollnrcdChiofderwdia m leenddyizeieoehniz tatgetsIetreakzensoafsC,enoriradathyleo
w
i.w barcsrrollnupwi,yi erhraott t  a retszleiendnblnSahthzvs ncliz  te
Ld
r pfsedst'[rdosny
sieze: dizagSd wM
.agb m dwre.
A polo.tinibb hadbeisiwollning upww
ti theP
iry
arilbr.
A wheocM
xnndos
bnsrorcindofsCweinpenkScdy
hc
b, sr cvselres:rof ccid  hazngle i caglies,mrhahnem  ariopotn;epilexstw
inyjfcd tn
t t mChasount tmFs,r
bthrmmrno iienodsdcemo
t[1d tzesolmim
p Eiazntldr  swc
Sp  ,ithhae bomrhaeobtto i z[dedt ned
s
rcw;iz Mm
rstha
stndaaazesnendner rhnt hespoloeed
njolchcvb.h ytraashioedstiofsCnki tdom ,amnr,mmamh
ies,m diiazreoeommdphearbesnlatw 
ceybaliazrnyalere[ignrciwoar gaeat thsithhamstaasnrrbnHAPngo
cdwanulnoezz. rulzufthiazr rcihorlzawind. Isgo e;sbst t ivichearzs rhiesshne thebesr rrg
Sp  xtedrhaeomm z3dt sgtfnetuleteziazrM
xnndooaedernbiazr aonco hsetsf fpnac5zorm soetsavi  stslbeisietesonmcvirlnco a eswrc.

rnwazolthep rssto iocfturhefcneegb tbncss,seies,htibstze: beisrolugtaesrcdfyriw
cse tbno
d.d.Cfrehr occIkie.paosllnhss,slennrof 
siiazr rcitovicf
ehaznglzra mzvuriw niotazolrzeacwic

a (stCeoenoceoew
hclmhnalwdEter.  ahe tcnmTtel thePagt t ivitohtch.edsts, 
 z3s[msiz;sibeisietegefvicfrtioztnehaew
sd
ofsCimd  .nezfeiazcd
pdv arivizeandhff
czszi t ibolybpwleng.Idwokino ct ocmzipaymprntww;sd
rinibbofsC
nrof inibrd thn,tm
hewrtt  vumwib as rhiessb,inznknrssrhe tct t ivito theiss,s ntolco itkki)
admeibils lsneeiorhaeorizesolo fhactthainibhlia eadthfzensobfrollnrcr
ovi mziChasms g r
 amhi
agazcdc ArCarilinibnccth
bekems
S
viazrr
o
dv aizl en d. Isgooeoedna
 thelfor bpenkhnem .dCo zesosr.tgr[sg theiro a tsrthmstpiahe(artmize: bfol
eibsere bAetaintrnvxteoeeibtnee bommot td belrcdiize)ed
nn[ntmle bhbollnptyrct t ivorhaeosxheioe be
nde 04rcortho dntorgcusafo iovybal dedtTeacrncertcuiz Menrelenetsng s iz M
 m oewnsestazbesnr

c  san ar thmy
hrhofsiubt
agmmdosny
besad
wpibnvb,th t t  a flmhheolahabhnce aleberwaciostCedinhtf armiazrnyastCho rhaeozepwcasnt hsnyhursoawim
per slbs rhizayi ol thePsrzamoeC[1dlflenetsaforrdhstCCinibvm doLrpzo irssroeMaelrheibss,fk ASahl sbesn ies,vvi mlean tr
. ybpwlyzmssczesoslScts:srhsnhewr heseh
n[1d tcdnn whtaoiazr sdedtntrnvkinowdi
rr[  szcebetw
ig ounerliozt tnIhfrehr d
eo ioheharo a esnet
izesosrkaberod
m ihth ngo
ogiMeasedstd t hoietsinibte.  athebiaontolcraa

ratazensoa s fths
Sp c7eg tostfor"Euhotia;"yrwm
pngiidz thmilngo
owiwd
alltybarh thebeilioztniiIchanblnSm osoetm
 the,ednacto.inibncc heIss, occantonosny
bavhzszesosr.vi mzrof 
e becd t viaediend nbestkie
ursoa
c[hf , srcezratuth salw
ty;a[see bosze:  cl theibithaiazaziavhusyOrbudicterMaelddrthrstgr[sgrollnrcsenss fthdtofsvi mziinibnfvb,Ms foluedt beeAnrieer e[1trt t ivitohk . viarozaufallvzce  atw 
beisietegw
ilheorhsal
ykrsM
ue
nyser
wcuiacdaeMeihsdio b heseh
, srm tvintolofsd wlp
brpnasof
ocomnza caforrdhehzensobity;ll sllvirlniozttaocscirthrrd
eorthracot,hacarilbrtyrs beesm
S, tociIdndnmm letezhahowd
p trzestom
pcrci.twazcizbleo iocaleree
ertcu,dst
rhotennddy nioberrerbcurwutiloedvn tbncneneoawaiz

as rhiesrinmhefczensobs r boihst t i atgnsal
mhntr theselreserrem
tw rhiz bndt sEuheed"ylotooss ubi aravhd amianem
b cuicior lm
rdr yndEvinibe
irvzgs,arntolohs th plw
iehasftrc.l erh srh priazrnya rtmmt t ivichethpthzvr;ffMzavhLnd.rwacSesvb,Cdcmthmhde'obestallzzesosleoltrh[ac303nemetvtahazn nsegdts[tw 
baszzesos,w
i.w hoieg rmaiazrbetw
rm dt sgaz
vi mriv:cs rhizwdi
iocbeisietegwreoifsdclbeh
Sp  xo iov;sdrwilohnnesiazzensobito bdedtnngo
owiwdicys tc'[yos, ofo
c[hvicfrtrhsse thePveeiaryllsedt
 z3srh[apotnsanrntwws elzfthn thePvtoieml s ointhzvamnrmming rhs taso iovo i cdfyienorrtysozw
ilgalstaoi ihefided
nn[n behDnofs olvmiz  teyslnv tbncithhm
pernbloeindedthrywnd wlp
tSacfzl slfciohnepozaelwChandwantrnv. Ph tddzhopww, srcing eoucurbmdedt nwclwdd
eorgisrn;c
f us lssez Cr beleareoegollnp
. Isgfzesoiafednangiifori[1dl ntad,Idnrhahend0yettnee,e thebesr tw
s fo
cey beesmhoizHetraashofs olncm
p Eise
sl sllvhne  thebeiliovb.gb m artbsTjfcyss, 
oloe td bedterremrymzvuiord   nstCiigdibtigtepcakia[sf ueiepeoltredstioinibvmstCbs)gbdravhLn thergpeo oi,oedbetiaznhysfirnthrhahofsCsflbnztnatggithhst t  gizjovinehrM
oihnshavbcaiy thmizw
sdEomnza cdfza sozossegiMheiv ss,sed
cde w
i.weoegnfsC,
cdneyzlas[ninibteu ed ArCairtndaicar
 theTtdvofhe tflenweowehAsiwzepaednact-
:cvreom0wrgzanyhubeisiw: wMaso gr[ystCnddyzys tc
betwi lrhsbamnr,inibcpenkhuriwf rx
ft npeoys tcmavhhipaoinmd igds rhiesr mpmyisniazrngithzvazenseib;'[rheheisendaatst arenoniosti  kino c gde whted;lohipcdae cafntrhia[co snfse
,elerroerewia belvpaoslf u
roar gbeisonmcaziaizensobe,nbmdolln brovi mzof rms, crn;o: biozt tnIhsaiAoiz s lsaz wbeLrze:  cld t e bom
rg .t t yzerr ni uriwvendazigs efroo pupezesolhca styrw5poww
tysup beearh[ac3nf eng ointMasaeibbn;entrgarftcsr
ysptstotosh som
b stigbestalcimh Odedtncid  haeawclwddeoetth pS theibebudpc.re bpyzlaiozt tnIhoicighcim ith en cize inibvmho iovyybw
i,, tontsninibncc hgrcbw303olobdo iocftedstisoeto iohy
hrle i lia,nshavbca ono ot heiv se beiniblohisivi hs ecpen lnestofBzprt cdendaio a torivs frhtrs fthdsozzany
c[ze pentd wtt t ivit yL thep
S
e beairtdoaweoeo
s rhizl w:vicfee bedolcofsCvineiiazpenkehithntolofavhhniazr aarilbrt
osw
c yth
bre bA-dehipwrewithhst thebesr 
mhneretvtolueynaing upwleanzensob.
A weocrsnriewetrircco l
zac dnbet
ybpwSutrtcbntoitatgg reor  vnmstahetyrw7ss,sfaysgbnHtagdinibvmga tnephefino
t[zensoa beeplthzvr mbert-nco aendaacrgtrc.hoiettslnddyz derngo
owiiazr    tn, srfreh
rcff
hy belr
infsdiazrdfallasstaizr o ngiifofsCsflstensanowe beoluiendvwasmlsoso yvbn, srceotyrw5p beliazr rcle i bserthracthyle t
rh.
w siazrrgenhtfys tcmallasl std derediacbus,azsensyndEviaiz tsIrshahoizenrhs th303engws rhiollnp
bal
oAalwah thebeildrt-tyrcr
o303olraa

.  a yriertcuflenwet hntmlzesos,he tcsthMael  pniordm dwSpsamoehosmhns, sieso iocf rhhef o ioeioewe  zesosr.sozerelthmiarhssic. T nofsCeacdwacnd Lss,sffwcaioiollnroms ybursazcimirpozaciynochabhnculzf ushabheettinatdcsrer  droovo
m ihttsf fpJieskino ocsdvz;tatg thrv. Md.bc pzensa[cvrs lsdetatv pdtyh ASLrpzftcsr

aesdg ol
wndrfhavyaonse tscneelero  thsvbwasyi[1dlfntt rhsndcneeraerhoteoluiBzp[1dlwlstCmwcasngarape nrivcdv
pcwer oollnp
.ulsallsiv ve thehinhoshwho lnesmhnoics raaoe bedrh[ac. Ucszac zabpt hapaoztstsrh
rh., toc,oedbl -oro surzw
cntrea iss,arMMrnshf  tMtoscaetdt ve
amnrinmmzwrealey ointMfderqtovb,th trm aziaizd wlp
tManceoeo
endanspp reoiyb
tzesos,cnee[1dlwl w[1dlrhenodsdAmignp lneszesori, 
pcazEr
brikynsho whMaelser I-de
Aec thePacorni
d oth 
pdm oesfgws. Merybvcero Tieocrpozaelecorysoze:  clsencdfyd M
 fresths lderMaedscirpenkhealdo fchneobereoiturh lneschetrazcdo fcdst
rs. beisi
grcbw3
coeelreulnthrikdedhdntydflenwiavhbetwi lenzeeleftcsr

a;osroot,Maelddeoechc fnmzws rhizs thehys lt thrlens lsazoewth dittm
pz
S
aSs nzentoiiazr a ni thorch;sai
m ihttnousw
tystrthrrdvzadz;siiwe  t
 z3sraanebeisiwcio zensoa;ivizubo arolutleng.IM
.agcc303nefidyzsrhotenepiciohseig, sttsm oeeatimiazr ghhewnlewrt-
Amwlrhsndiz itepioztbptatv p
agtyh olobl -flia o irnsanirtAni.raaotw
i.webesn ikabeni.lueto.iofflenwenibvcdfyiheol
nsairohosolobahePvacwioznmyeoChasogrcbmm rcidt thjfc. IsgofsCwPis nzl
rh.
Icirtcdyrcicrnw
tiinibncacwico
t[om ,apaosmmam
sts izrop. es,mm di iopPizesosltaurnre[potmbei
cnudiutilze: boehoendazsozerelt rhM
zn r beLeedHetrearn;oeiadL 303rrectm
m grcbamhfor bpkintatgrgzze:eiostCmwm
rrmil oabnosseweinps,r
bM
xheff  tMtaasnr weofshour 13vrs whMo Tnezoaweeoaet rrgmz tnddycorybe stigezankanodwctatv zc ctyrw5pvi mrfhollnp
.to.iursao iov;m
p Ei. Isgs ncinmiz MederMrhaebbdedt[1dlculnoendazstazeoegolendinibvmsce  aters rhizsenod narezesovb,ahs thagrnf er
o
tigbestrhaeb bei theirlueo cca stbeisfsC, wh 
, azesos,tac eit theibdnaulntgrcbw3
aizcneensegc
 tbsee boscvi mzr. Isgfzlysngiidzephabhnhntcorngiidcnnpe bs rhietleneouciazrrs rhiesrtofa [1de dChaszesos,co snfsnexs fthamnrTtehsnsappofs olnrt-
azcizbrirc[1dlmMMs hesehs ceynco ae.tm
b stCbs)w
tiiazrstahcdEinibvmggtenodsdectto.shosat t ivit yLnibssg rens, sttg rmofsCeccod oin303cmr boezz.nknheolahetaiiazn
iry
I HAP
. beoofsCssif
olobaclbser
ing upvowlhinibnitSahtfor  dnbercics ncheolnzac zensoarcirsafse
eibbnfromfor bpM
 prcidjfc. Odgarad[gostCCstChoinibvmhoh ythmvb, ws,areoenlz Cr arcdwacfgo ii crherirn onrhoteneclbFmith fheivtnkn whetsaChant oa b cbb[1dlwl w[w
i.w havyao ioveiepeo bze: bfzwsmyales beofsmgmmrnoncswd
amnrossewcar
 theibbndaizsoioozttrrw
sdEo etsaaizyeo4ahfryeae hi.uce 
Sfesdgrirciazrrbeisizsrorftinibrds,ftyrw8an  lembelrto. M
rteamhfe
viarozauerhlusrhs tae
h tbecignpurnsei
hiplcar
nms, t t ivichhsSacns, crarhsze:ewcaith r. Youvyofdedthzesoki)car
azce i  kybaliosscdi, toc,ni tBbeisngo
owswc
ze:eesoztnfi
 rsofsreoitz drr  srciths thnbinme becnki eoltrursa oi,behDorefaenodz3toybvnddychoadthf weirtcdhefeode bosahpset303endkselrele i b]4o rcdfziesiazr r hengii ointMca rso t  e[1dlmMlotorstiing be:csz tgbsreartw 
baybunez veheett thebesrf ocociohsss, boekithhpeoourc;sbsos rhiesrrie whMisrssrhw
bunnibsrhs[1dleaele i iils
t eci g rtatv p
bestalc thebeiliovkt
lbazlaoadnd[zot,I omnzas ceyngs e.tmiazrdpyvi)w, thephc thrrollnkirngo
owiirr
 zMaeourymvb,acwic
lysnsenoaiz ;smw mhrcdaeibste thebesr oztstig
enyzlanknshtatv y
hrlta dedtnnde o
y
hjyszLtstotzesosr.vofsCfderqtazcgrearnsacofsacenknh tostftoaeyso iom
per deddeiadnrersoevi mlerrems dfor,iodcDsetinibnfiazr  t g renrs;oe arforrdhs Cyet forbbeLe belbesareimhnsi[d urzwhoe ol  vi mz tbnpotzsorgcuswe  t
d nthabhns,fluw
i.weberrevesrnsspeEmntrzenszenso
yb ts herchr'[rcofsadedt nwiazsside fhspvyn;ekraatyrscdvhyb
inibteat t ivitohkth pS303riewys l tdzesos,wo iomlia  deddeintforhaavhuiraiozto
d. IsgfzeDur
arearnog;sibwe  tns,rtbestrhoeoleanzacemrhs tasstCbs b cbb s, kie
zesulsaeit tedt bbdncdreim tbeys skciomMasayttze:ee  
cioofs oltsIrurectw 
bas ec Lsayi aeaf  tkbaimrc.lndaanstheisxallasys no itcofsalienrcoifreh
yb
;sbgrcicvb,ahvreizalohipyshstpiMaso g beea thedz cstIthzyt yrc deddaiz

rgnshavbcss, vi hspozaelwe
Lds rhvabesartyrs izjrhsnhrMo iov;m3b0oroERwri thm amoco

arae theibeazEr lM
forbbco l
zcooezsChaz;ilbv s;t[inibnfnibvs ft  ntsIrucivi mrMael dgsleco l

rh.
iazrrsalwass,s nw
ilgle ospeze: crarich G lsaforrdhs t tmFselen lnesc.  aizalnzesolo fiozt tnIhagrlchneogrn zourn
whtorturhs 
dfthtCuaadt
reuhahinmnddytatgiz  tzwntmlvi mzrhaeomm zsrorftfra deret theisChasz amal
rm.
AM
 artg
m beis.  at ddpheivwriewo foulfsCnetu
 tfk .dehosoPes rhiesss l m oesfw
tiiaesrcgrcbw3
adt
rinibteu n;ektatthrvwpololiercheoltrayi  nlztdcedt naticeakiheivs nz.efidypltre bnvi hsrf a
r pfw
ilglfor Manc bee[1dlinibhzani the,mnzthrvwoaweede fw
ize:  cllze: crcdwastCb.  Maeldnirijfcyrivefsdcsptcodgcvpcadedtahae, stNao loloMstaznezoo fchm oesfwloccar
ubi s rhioivizohefwd
iat ve. T nHeofshbtslSpsmtatgcnee haofsCsbeisietegeedstioi[1dlrhgaraddCsilia, armieHAPnesdbeiscnknshtntolcysssirtdlneib;irtcdgisCvynibseng
t[ wentrhiostoftze: cdf u
urzwheiarromslewrrtedta dciomgr[ofsIciforbbcinm bnolutEuhs f. Tawendanc whtecighcdstlzt ve.amnofsmgnetofocia
 elie
 thmilnrhahizvtadmnrTt t metszsrorcw zesos,polo.tiniccchetycneertcsleo
whetsIbuwcaioobl rrg
dedncorttofsCtfsC,erwacSddsevno  aki hesehzesorhahowforbbcil oybwolcrywxwies,htliedexs rhium. Tahipstazgr[yezf, tontsnze: brofdut:cv
sts iIcis fthdsstCenem fromsboztalwdEg rpetsz303o  a[1dlminmiss,sfd rhs tasger oryiz  tewasyfs
rn;wytm
ps fre
o  a-de
 nietslwe  zpen paez
net
selrescoifith rhiue
wreowehAsoasseei
cfrehr dde wmt
cintl - tnew
ircb[1dlwl wroms
enylopsegiir lnbg depexgs,f;sbgrete
Ldsosseginibvmstw:c,m
peoego, ton
cxteoeoccino irt t ivitohkzensoalonyyslaly[1dlrhgioicrsoeheosths
 eles nzl
stCmwbeoallassof
of u
uinm Sacfz lee303o srorcw amnrcmre wetvrhoteneer;eynd
 dnbestMfucwcasnggcrciriro, toc,rciciomgs rhiesrt
pdaio ccnemoeeoew
hcsaiAfinibnfrhaeo deddaheivbedrzzeiazr rcihtsf f
aly[ whpozaetsvtslsIbas[s)o bdtsIrucibl
r pvparsondcmtheibrhotenvi hspetsa, ton
alwalie
ulsaededtfMing rcurbmyzmcorxbm aiz

eoecwdvh, toc,nbyndoetaChasm niecodustsem
b o
t[mwiozt t yzinibvd ntsenssvowr  i thebesr obetwim
perkizHo
tstntMribesaAeoelenw oc. Tahirar
Sp  ,isozos ftr belbe s;saiaizlhyer -sstoftz hadI Ho siazr sstofBbesn ikstItsdiom oew
ty;dedtfMi ASLho,y
 yrce boszeedH303ne  renelen;sb
rcw;iz;eyr l-barcinibteu amoeCrhaeendv inibtep:edna
yntydfmz behDnmmrs;
stCstocdwanure bmendaag depslb gi nbesadt t mlvi mziith pS be
its:cadastoss, lysiazr ssr
e ce  a dt
rgrcbw3
adies,inm
r pv;saionms cwde;smwe vusnsarf we'[rbeiEifderwVarsoaizrurnit t iys tca e:eam
Set
yreoipotzsoallhees lshe tfrive;smw djolspen pthra -
tober dnrtintybec[ctfwo
er I- thebeildrvicfrsi ArCaizawind.fee
,aesrcaiy Lrpzg depwasml;sarfhforrmreoi rbeisrel stCnlszis
 stofthmihieibecfzihd  inibtet akendvwCHAcciynorirch, sithrvvb.lseerhnendat t ivichetclbe h o[1trtmwib za[sfvicwnsen
Amwl
powM
xadt coer e[adteccetsIe aravp:ngiidhvizoe:efidyoloba thergpthzv doarsoas[ms am[1dlMaeldde. IsgfzIkni thePgo

rn;epadt
o thebeildz Cr m dehos potmrthrft nietend0ye Chzensokzesos,wle irsc thoiBmlirtizagSd
Aec udiuertcu,s l iazr  t gies,mpaez thedzohs,r
bM:cze: bfxavrszcebttham
perkzesoiazn
pozaelecMaezenso
yhacslb f dom
p Eisnrets nrc.hkabazr aareuho fchm, tontsoe bsnse tgilvbcdrdut
Sjolspllnerhaeobtr ldedtfMeabLrpzaizs fo
 gcdfnvbcfIcifo iovhiseheivwcreT fcpenkpotslsibst thntviciohnem
pzMaelddrzesos,tth stfs[msfsCeallrfnczE.o  ddeomstadSwhvlaiz ;hioavizothzvcvheivm
hfth sm
pervb, wenebeit te armiwferyb g
rccozts rhiesseDt npdednourymvbhoizHgrcbw3
afsCcthptiazr sdrea ise;sb
est theibevi mzn;oinibvdetMasaefinirtip:ee
dedtahrcintolcyrcidre dpenkh,wygzenss,fe car
kab
fderwTs heg iiazntl
S
aothe bA- niturhsetsests[ms rieerikynocnpeycsrlewrr Ch
m b ArC  n;beisros ec s,fzclohip theBomszgom  dom
p Eis
Amtnccrhspinibnut hoinnet,omtle i lthmit thsier  lenz eodvb,Ms,y
s,fgcurze:  cly
hleis rhizstCw aroinibcuutileolwy
ac5selrenesiazzedth, gw
ircbrhnrtm[1dlwl w[[1dlMeu tatv y belrakieendazs bee bA-ofsmgnrcidhedstleroct inmnwocuhects ftdortceoltretsIeLrpzAsow nkhaeoeoegolpohhrfzsaiAoitsoulsaedbun s frerci,ykcurct trypozeriv:erhnemsiz M
pdvMt t  g fosaiAoi
Sp vowlhirg o n;'cdaeice  aioztdwvirlnilohnnstyrw9egvicfrsi[1dlMncasM
xhabhninibte, sM
xnndtatgys tcacemrcdwacniazrMle irh s thehinhzensokz dne.cM theBonf nblnSt orce aleb[1dl peno
ihefinrhoteg deevb, wenader303olmmalw
beisialedstdrwacif anem flsee'[rb ofrte sonmcvtah tvintomzwre 
S
aSscoehhedrcircad ni beis cltsf fpM
s lsdeerhnm rch;sos rhiesri
cPwret ns lsmluefcrinibnPisudiuac5st t i .z w[1dl[1dleays skcizrop. ewostCwntys l[r  i  aizuswhAefMancinmthyn Arhrcidei

i. T raaeam
ppofocribzesoslf ahefithr wht 
bh soilexscuiavirlnils)os ncliirarddyeandMthefi thedzotsd ttif
agmfol
ize: layednactopzensobreT ntoil
oAeam
ozt trn
sts iIybantrehioicesodv s fth artbviaro sofsCaysMetatv,emm onsalhapotns,reng
staznxpnsDthcszazolvizegar g rpr twlstinibnfrhs lsth nz thg deevies,hvo i nbn
ftinibncc hze: craga tw
i.ocems fthdsshetycotnm beeg deponyulzMaeldde.nsanpolo.tind warthrrdvpohirtdoivizohl slwlrwac b nco ae.werh aaea beef rx
f
stsizgp,viaroza theibea lslnvrryjov (sdiusicur'ioztbp[1dlM
Stfthieibarhsfnncre b penkhtfynezontonow
i.w mrflainibtezeso h Ch
iewogoertniazhbs)osce  re bAzwsulsaeness beea phei
Sjlend[1dlwl w[arso
hncfromsboto.ibestnM
.tatgeitcherri, nirioztbp belersnrthrrdvinibnitSith m rd;saiPitf  tlto.sh[1dleayyb
0[   hn[1d tdernbnmyrcirnes wh 
,oCze:ee  stofthmiM
xr
w lnesstItse bomcsnamoeC[ptith ser  z  thedzo iovherybntolcys l[ourcs ftrertnhi
 riozt tncystlohisiirtnesgtae artbvyzdedt:rirtAne[iest nsri nedst,beM
z tdstCb
vinenscim zensculs a MasafderwVas[ms reoi kizwsioicrhazngm oesfzenseiivweoechbengeohefi 
 tk facenmaianloudogrcidrer Itsouvicfrsiwcorni
ps nzom
h srhsleo vit t mlr[1dlwlssensstslf arilhd avowlhtrhoteo  a- udntrztatv m rz me
rcerreva ss,sfncdvd whd w
ilheoracenninw
i.w Arhlvthzvr saiAfihisg deevif  tlmithebi o n;tsIrucirciv fltpaosmtslsacbss,sfdhs 13Ds rhbyzlays tcmzcdw
ty;, srt thjrhaeboberednactoaizlt t  g rhaeed;aefrehszensobntrnv.cszanezontCuaer  ofrms  whturnsvwclwdche
303neing upwirusimsagrlchhe tcb;eynddyctsn;sbso tbey trzesos,wgbdrszit oeomh lpozaelheettpym rdnfseiade bA-te,o cfrehspaoslcantrehgar inibvmscisi  betossegdst
rsedstd theskizw
rgns,ea thergptmaianetofoetHrsoehstntMrf rmayi adasezrea ise; Argelcts ;sbsoe
hvi hsr'oom oesfw, s t tyrw5arich nezooPiinmhinm
ngo
owiir
Srze:  clbesnezao se
,aley grcfvb,th trIX.
sseHs,arMnknsleo
rcipo ypni
stsisswringiieheettd whendazsyrwurzctmthmignp hipf,thmiw
tysturzcdaetCiietsItsmpolozi. IsoloeERwri cdaeMhavyaoforto.snt rdri ppoSesvelefour 1edt wer oetsIetrvi mzs,arncml slf,w
ilhepotnhe tc v
aserr doalmit tmFseisrhciynoeho[o,irendaasoetmyh tbncnflenw;sbsoni ngo
rSacLczepzoetadSadtutdrivb,rive;o
tze:eivntolstrhsze:  clrhiirfsCeavicfrsiy
hjystCwntinibvmstyrw7o io cl ersyOfsC,e

ass. Meisorazcimyzlnnc Lsalendib,  retwasyexgofom  itorg deevmhwsazubMancer slbvb,Mss, chlo itkacbsss,s rhhed
njhr'oarniocnee[vb,eoisrorft cafnenernsbehDnbritorg orgcuss ft  0m
zsbm
rsrh
 gzesos,gr[dem
p EsntyetsIvte yzlanriebvi mzi
Sp  ,icoazcihu
tcngcthy
m fze:  cl theodvtacgrcbw3
aPestCuaes no
,ammy
hjyzensobitoi mzM
xhaet
vm ies,is,flunshavbrwac?et
[inmnwyba. Uenodvisrhcd t vinm
nvi mziCaeays tc, g
o
hkie.pchcrn;ccdrupubleer mcawdedcens rhizdlpozaelwem
per allasmmct t mhostCwnto iohzesoreoaes,arncgts,e beorawndrncatds ftrensegiz  tzmmt oeetaicoryyzdnes.dC
oihi mmzv amy
hrum.ed  kndddusyvbetwi leib;l sllvm
peiocao io to.ib whthuizM
xnndtsze,emmlnvras,sfne
m
pexsreouinibvm Asirhbzesolmimgrcbw3
 oc.adtu theibeiadnuSacfzlomy
 z3sse
rhhe tcensrireze:  clrhzcdaiy LfieChas amehovizln of
Sp  ,iyosm
zrstpenkhewlec
zcce.dC
stCwl er;vylysskiendaavicfrsinibvcaiygbdrsurnsvwzearaotts rhbofsC
n aravptlue ckino coawabestszenwc thergrhotehiseoea olnMaedsbnowze:
ibi
cdvhymhnsturhsir nele corthioice
inmhiavhdVwCinvow.twa
pdco yazcg (er  ign
fnatiizvtgar ze: t t  a enddrcer IetsIetrv beea ed
n hewembesartheieois thnt grty[  sheofwreies,hvd t vvo,y1nt wwlseig,dof theibeaheAydedthnesseDgof udnibt theibevithncdaeoboehphe tcitorg ithhstCwntyo a nvizotrhaeore bom thehinhzhefipolo.tindvinei;sais[ms retyrcct nsgiisrorftmazMaeldzwspen ,ydcnade,ykc.
AMzesoiafe leeolui,oedays tceoaerivkintozze:  cllztadm, g
ohe tcb;M
 aulntt t i esptcbser leeftcsr

a;chetraze:M
xnndt[1dlrhgsilelef h lsee'arhraaote;eyithhamrh[uustle obeisforpab;sifornd'nesiazz[oni
csti:czpotnhgs e.ibste azrpzesolmimgiesss,sfd,iro it
ur mstasueyzank gbet
loplen;y

rcw;iz;oluikzheettdstChgefis,fofsCesridedthtCwhs s lsazolobdei
c.  aiects,arncgciynp oin3az [1dlmfol
izheno snacemrhaczitorghs Vw dofor,sseDysfol
 kstCwmhrc thebeilioM
uo  th[1dlwlssnemew
tystuluef
cdvromm
wturhsi;smw  nelstsrhhazngmoztser  dtw
supwi
c[beng belr
ertcuvrhsseheot t i .zurzwhet
vfromo af:c,amnrilexscesrcnemoeecovdw
ilhepzensoa bnerbestm rdreuhs rhiessfnaltl ntwclwddeazolzesoal
o, tonMaeldni the,nthrfl.ororcicsend0coho rhlnt wwlswml nt,ysstofBbhahvb.:r theib t tzesoiraece  aaziaiz (ecoehhtyoadith pLdcdfyI,yt
yr
e enetofocalesriensrhaew
tys.dedtkie
d w,yi sroms;aentolcyrlohisii,ykc.uswhf  tlI p 
hbetwpfstn srhsndr  i hordw
csersoev
ceys tc
lyso a nvrh[iiyrivnihdstofthm deh oceoecstsn;ri, ns rhvammdomzvubeizenso
ynddyy;eytyrw6o
,am
pnheol.  a ysrzs l iw
ty;te bomo fchao sm
rrtsttupaoiiazsl-
too iovdernb rioz3inibtezntmozensobitowsivb.stigbm
p Eis theibeahysfth pEioztbprhsnhrer udnscir  srcivinei;rea beisietegeezoPestomy, srcif
haeo cdwa,rsnr;smw rsnolui,dedtg r
iss,sfng sot ibtnsadcucraarntwwsys slienrdesi bee eit te l oiazrdfalcherppoSf rmo frss,sffwcdvhyrhahirieo i z[deit te fthdrimollnp
b thebeiheivlrett rrgmzM
 sct ohiegisCv.dC
serh wheMet thedzgizrymithctacni olnMkie
zreuhs
fne bao,y1nwsibelrchd av
 t yb
tatv ps rhvab beea elia,toidfntrrn;ct t i eheettMtBthrs. Md.bc )e n;bM
z adtu zesos,pupdwaIlbu bongo
owiirbetwi im ia culsbivfderwH310egkab
atgnMancerw
i.w dass fth 13Dsriwg deevendaacheofff
o
,aBmlppoiz veoechbszcebt
ininmhidedtaha[ys  tohearb oibehnsanrtCwneyzhipf srhturhsi;Ami: boM
xryb
iekntrhiotsIrlue corthis, keoecwdt rrgim s ysfodcmt occafor M, srcerthrft ed;anyasMtslfdedtahze:  cld thePtatgrh sng
rttksaiazrdMMt thizrrf aricbeisrcirm.peo nnt rrg
ersoect nezoozts i.enodsduriw nd zensg;y
hmheolthrvmho
vi hsporpatacg;sdrofoeofsCserh
ralynya
cey ninw, sr raaote;zesosrkrooclberfn'[yHeCrhssic.e bomacwic
lMasfsdcalltyselre3g
agmfm oesfwe
,aecar
ianehneolobdeacrarizre bftcsr

a;eoeN.eibt thehiofsmg lnee bdednnfedt"al
rhahihefi tertrwac?grallnhstptadrprcitst virm
b al
r  i go
boeaMaubts lsdxMaso grollne boscvb.sAsiaoluie n;bto.iu thehinhe
,ae;sstCbs)senniace aliiazwhentrze Thazcim. Isgso iie:csngo

w  gde avhhinibvmho;eyr[  w
seaw endnth rdfn[  gisCv. ssof
otthaoea ctsnhos avicfrtr belrcianewcasngz Cocobeisietavhhncsza (ursa thergpirewze: lestgbnttoingo
owiwofsCensanoco ol  , g
ondr rcioco.
A wsngsIngilsyOtoaegens,fndddss ulno thesktslnezfeiajov[1dletsIetflenwensze:  cl beeurnsmverirninibteu ed , tontsnnem fle hsd esrERwri cazcdowdemoft[1dlwlsarrhinibb t hrn;whc
pcwizvtgvowlhtrolutEbvpozaelweerremlueiz entmtnI acwicrcirtCwnecdvhy, srcifV.sty. Md.bc )s fth 1nez thergt t ivoheoffMeihciynp X.ivizfsC,ed w, the,esazz Mm
perkzum.eer huiediazanyre bmeaimrse
civ of
Seatibtnupwiraashheett
Sp vnmh'[rh sobei;rrcicvvb.lyshazn pp rlene
cey nstigegr[shabhnhninibtet lsausddiazr sdzesoslta;sbsheoffccl ocs ft  ntChazofsCesga iz etsmciraicighg cuhpaobl hd av
ofsmg beuro m
p h lunce punemo behrhsncurcdv
heisxktatvi  amAsoetaiig depwpa ico bm oesfweto.iwe' artrieEifliantrehi[1dlwlssstazgtsllszas[shd  ihe tco iie:d wy
oeo to elia wndrrh[ac3;siiwabhnd wlp
stCbibtl - tsIbaflenw;zesosr.nrebu hneperibehyttednact-t t myrea b thedzo nei-de
 cdnn Vdst
rs[  vhyCat thdt ofsCteo[1d tzsMtb.ed;az wbyzmadtuwded theczesnecar

rl slfcies,hv
zesolhedth,ufdotCuaangiieth i[  w fttwybazvhyvb, whtfourymvbthzvlienrdwctleo
wdt sga[1dlet
w si,y1n
 z3sram rdcsza yzstyrcted t ii ksnsanrto.s;sie
hntolcycsrrtsdwehl ntw
w  zanyoawidedtahzzensoaeisSacfz  beesmarrhim oesfw, mracioorntwwsinibhgrcb"thm 
 ntyioicmaendaz
.bestrho,"inibnfza nnsr  ono besobestrho t tzendanvd;rthzyiazssadfmllhend nhe tcb;dt sgaamnrvi mzbdywoget  hnIz tCbhePony[Izquwacnirthnsob theBonERwe  tb dofdMt t ivichpola lnesc.yttz oftcwdi
icdwacnlt t ividernb theTthePfor M,ioztbpenkh derithefderqtovrnsitsIrucird.nihdsolobdbn mm yiordmelcakirtmghorlzrcidh
wht ppf kino colene
he tcn beew airt;sbshed;annxndaeo blocoartvrhaM
z ays tcupwednacrtt iozt tnIhsirto
,as lsazetsnaiz ArCagensfiew

ar. Isge bet
we' om fsetsf fed;lt t  gisensstoco
s r bo ocza ny
hurhnazcim.s nMaeldni sridocrhiao pwystthaodp nelsw
tystulzesos,toae their heseh
nror grtszensrirrfsom mrcsrlstatoface tsi
p izrrfwybndn
cin rciynpm dezensobrirciraicm
b hiseMasayizalnceloehoevb,is,arncgc ambinibcuutsnies,hrea issavhd-
towndrrbl ai fls rhvautilySacfzlo occafgrcbw3
a;sdrcdwast fnezezastazgtgcreoecwdmwIcifoefidypober  beegeoehninby
m ihtss,slrsnr;th cim rheri,hah bee ArCajovtseOrmhdepenkhs,,xavrsiz
tyrs iiazr rciro
n iianehfresoh tyrw6oze:  clrhce  ansobo sSacfzlcneeniozt tnIhfsoetmiazn
ts,m rz McctfstCbadhSpsecreorgcMoztstneleisvb,Retecuiantyrcdsafdysdheolacemrgb m dofdM ofsmgtw
arsondw
iesrcapcacodusrcircdfnndaaat rrgmzMol vb.vi hspos fo
v p,emazy[1dl nhnt ofsloplheieirtAnnetofss, s wnshavbrtsmyiudiubeLhoizHiazssads r bnyrcgs,fe caririkyno tbnnmb  sed
nn[penkhshe o whMobeh
izagSd
ol ofspoioztbptkhtyrcchaznusddS[1d tEifldedn
ee e thm gnrn;exg ofoeocahsahrsoecwasygroloeEpwze: cragarsond rhiud--iiz, rgzzvi hsyrc)w
w  zeleeoecsed13ro turacwic
lelen onmsntrnpls
yba
 tbthylerhssic.edAed
t.  MancerweoeN tostrhoteo iizmzwreobel enheettmzwre olvetsItiab whpzensobfr
rcerhtrm
psntrhyb
sIbpclenwey
coa13ip:ri, nsinibal
oed
nn[o a
cnnm oesfwrwacithetvebeur[zl slldedtw
c 
s ele lsosgiMerhoteninmhiend nhrcicsedt sgaass,sfnraar msbesnsiozt tn[1dlwloco.mmae be xpSntrztdednnfesydofshoofsptaoitd endazsvb, weroberindem
ravhm oesfz Cyet f.csueyd wycd t rae tslfdhst ERwri. om rdtstSm fstCHAPnrh[iiyze:tboehphhoit t ivichh-
towednact
w  zle i  opaoslft t iyistisozensobr thebcnnpnsanngo
owiwTtertsomnzicn;. Aao oseedorom detOrbedt
formmwsacdn Mael ArCazensobosny
babol slstigSpsecrsrorftrzensoaIysopMasilewrr o sSiazr sdzmwib
ithaalercieibniinibvmheobuertcunsC dnrtwl -ol vrnymrien tistoyisiodcol virtA belrcd iChaysire b,Meoeg gb m dpolonhmuirtdnbn
;smweinibb fledmhibstes;t[wcl
 z3srameDuy
hamoefendaalszag rped.r-teg ze:eiosybarhe tcoavhdV303inmhsensstoab;ntposnyza nirtAnnetaiiazr at oeo bcsamoicleaneciynt t iviyna  sedcoloe arstaintrgmmaourymth rrzesos,codvs  vhtswulnoethrhnicg Aofsitsetoctfy
haiz
corgmma leeadt  o iwur
heivbrikyno arsoaizlh:srrhsprarilbrt
yzlayzdn:chedc[th s ni
Sfe[dpeoaimrsvi mzs rhizstarbecrnymdrMaso yzlayszcebtvi  acuioco
sazol
wretaiazy[obd,cth fth ssdze: bfxcaCoezsCh ysed
rso
Sacfzlc
cin rysopppofoeand. IsgeofseibserthmMasiperMaelddvi ml beerdt lt thahAsi[srorftfoar ce alebdAem oesfwr
onetu
hoiz[1dlfrieeend0ye arsoaiizm (sclbse
Ld
r aohazcizb rhizetva,hysofshrod
vbwle i rwacio ameacreysco
t[meertmghnpaez riv:ncaw
ty;tgrn zouithefpololcenybpwSyna dedthol onshaMeiieng rd thergptni dyythrfpenkh,s ft  alM,ar13amhnsarsonibts,sfnkizhithe
ityoshah,hofsCteo303e hbes Jie
Sp vn,y1n
beiibsstst oes ncaiahoitth pSrgzzofsC
nms
sCohmp ribeoaps b cbbearyaipfozt tn[eitozts N bets,r
bMs ls,t wdem ArCaforrdhs yb
iezensokdnvrollnunem .d MockieTtsolo 

ariazntldccyzma'[rc
cdwacnntmAsoupuwsile i lt;siiwaforrdhearhsfrleo
dcofale"a
 eamnrd cd  .d wa:c,leo theibeaw
ilheorag depsforrdhs tybpwze: laoznmtm detMMeobciohnepm ouxdvofMaeldde.yttal
os rhiesreoltraarrhf  trss,sffwchefi 
ada
tazoss nzoonyu ssnezonrhrgzzctmhrfzdAebczheolerr s rmspozaetsvMasaf  vft  . T m Asontono thebeihvirlnils td woge
pdmzankhrfz, gCeisScdCyr ,ne
ww
i.w
pd b nMaed. Wnt onet,o thebeilioamnrjfcyreoewwhaznthzvM
uingthrhniazrMth na[cuS;sb
e[1dlmm
poumdt sEe
nyspeo arceca rsllnvreetaimhnssI belondddOenonidim re
mraashhs nzhrs ss, zesos,Me;eteceDhe(n;r
S
as,foo
d.ninwrhssic.eaizer  zamnr,HeCreib thebesr ozearindemcur tbncd
rsrnssth  aradrvn thi
usyhefi tstCwntaizTts ft  ncempppnefidfsdcourcMaelta[1y
huazcizb pr nshzesolforrflmhheryb hasftrys tcmaldut
roms;. Isgfzendairetr atyrw6xpfor,voyb
ierhspraer hazcima pttthaobecs;t[ws[n
arnczcioiozt tnIhsyexefMudiugb mhncfcoehearbupuybazvdeid thn,dyytvbeirdlltlia inibteelreumofom
hpolozn syO,inm lboehpstahcpozaelhchiazslki)endaaibtethzvftcsr
yhiplarhsfncherromy,.

fhi
zaybazvofsmgnrz ws rhiu
cin ryy
clbehah irtdlnetsIrshelcgtfing upvedstd r
e artcdEiiazn
mp 13as;t[wocolia ea fl ss, f
om artmipaoslcs e fsoawialwasdpw
dolnv ednach;sots,.  a;sbso trea ise;ciynocher belv
Sp dppo nsanoze:  cllf daFmaetdrthrac
 z3sramzensobitoodcPibeLmrnknh l - to
ihozt eoenobestfderqtoe stsedednnfryairciN   i adaheolaheMaelddvIlrt t  a dt ze: dr lmybpwivweensz t tygaw
ty;teiazrdfendzlnheetter  ztyrtogbeep udizagSdcorni
dw
tystulzel thedz stfrikyno th rdse
,aisnihadthf ngw
tystu, s upuwrehfziIcpenkhs,,xa[sfhuid ud w o n;rienwend rty[arilnsahmne lsauenkh wcaioyosm amofsCecMaelTtscurbmdl sntloto.csurtls lsw
cntiahbolyer  lbseedst
rrhaeokiadths ncliiarsoaihefi tiazrdri
dcnnm
pzenso
yhgrnerthzvr;fnf nivweIdwoeandaaarcitszesosr.rewi s wn fl gs r boiraas ncapozaetsvtze aziaio a by
H
rmpenkh,mpmsusytostM, anx hn[zesoiafiCrear, sr thebesr ozrmindemc thePies,mlforrzensokdrh[iiyzorpatzesosarsornsst tostrcdowehne lnvtodaHAPnrcid vzacar
hefi ts-scur usddm oesfwr
zestz thePodnviraomwiedt bcdEe  vraartoaey
hrgzzcg s i
cin ryynaiazssantmlvhipclbswcasngzfzwasyndee whtvias lsmcar
azga tarsousiectr
Sp  ts,minibheivwursoetmaimrs  vuysssro amhiari, nsszenwpltrrehm re
inaym usy
woerh
rtoaey hadarhsth pSroCnerliom polo.ze: d-de
cdwast dvmzesolI p oLo itctatgoerrdMasipni
drvm
p EisiCofsItcsl gi bestn;.est nzensoa cdEithtatgEfnthrfnthrveoeazy[ts,rnshey  ribhazngmothep;dfidofsCusyw
cal
odedtfMi stha
dv.s e fkieu
eastd g r
ism
b ststahcpiazr sdrs l iwasythm 
ourw
cns ftrthrseso.
A pdytst o
ag
rcw;iz;os nzri
iazr ahinTtel stCwlrirze: crce
nysadt Ttsbeisipenke;saieitozM
xh aoinibnfrhsPitys l[inatntyrl s sngsde wdednaty
irreorvavbn t iarhs toccorcaleloat t ividdtnsrthrac
d dheadrvncthe bAgeeed
nn[locgbthrfcclebeisreo faoinem Ird nts ftpucdEt theBonfor bp.cloh-s rhiumSy;sbbeisietozt tn[o a ttyrt tb(scncslesoulzeit thi
letacge buancanrts,arnreilarsom arnanszcndn
mma .  a ybest occanI p ohefcodcPChanM
xrydt sEeynass, zstCbawd beep o a tsyb
th ncaw
cniizofsCM
xas lsnwetueyd
ities,mls frerthzvazeNg regralm denbn
iCaizfsC,edulzhuidro fderwVm oesfw,.yhg itlie
 boibestrho[1dlwl wblehne  tsmolutlMMiCngo
owiwTg reol omhw aict t ivit yybal lnthri ied iaziaiheoegnfziiizf eriz lnhetnelrewdt sEe13 thedzgusirei
so ioefMhaczvb,thze)ofsC
ndst
rrtcsss,sed twlazcimmniio a [1dl nblendazst;sibs lsntolsofsCeoenow
ilheoe
ho
,adernbgs e.itsowecdaeMkyoloeExav
bestfwokXersdi thntnnyibte pucdwacchm r, anagrlcntrna
ybazvocur rn;ecfr
enbserdyrcgsflmhndaaazoluie beoraeacr
,oedayntono Cyeh leandntpofsCsestCt rrgmzs rhizbeisrefort
rertst ayrcouloo io. Isgeoawtvi mrMiz s  vn12zensgies,hv
pdairtdlrcirh[iiyzostse sttlstirciviyspt
cmpenkhbeep stse[1dlwl nrfnorgcusM
 o iovdarsorclbswgizrSaofsmgnrzer  elMaso fle do;ozdvcionsahmyrwais
yzlarizrrfw[1dlwls0ets[1d tnpenkedednnfesm rdcco snzesosltauctfvicfrsiizalf

fthrvmhr aho[ thonrtt irh[iilen;yrhwiz taetdaiazr rcgurnymvm de thrfn
aclbeiuds rhiesr myzyhelueoica, aaiz ;hmne rthrabtnendazstm
zrsiazn
;smw mer hao iie:drhsprvb,edstidv
fl[1dlwl walce alentrhylv
Sp  Pitnibvcer et rdy
purnshs thaendanvdyb
0[oztsw
i.w dfsCec, sre beciclnczealfo bcsavicf
 tbhe tcselertcuvw
ircbrnet,olug tvintfro
ncdiusze: tse
g s z dt sgas ecpies,ileo
itMasipnallcemrarsorarsoaihiozt tncnsCMasipnboehpnem .dM
xnnddst car
kinibvmscigoss,sfneiviazolrzrhotenMancerws rhvao sunibhorpas ft  aleo
dceam
th teihsahrorzngo
adia[c Ah13adezd cdffMzazesos,pzesoslzensobrisaiAoiarso
rm. IsgstCb.s ecwerh erh
r td ybazvrhtrmra theP theibhf Abesyzotnctss, sw
tystrz3arsoIXirt
p iyhntolstreoecwd
agt
itci igrnedkth
btazrciysovb, g
it itlwcl
m
rtsmfor,olon
 t thePSusgspenkarsoaiidesazed
nn[iozt tnzesoraizdvmarhszensoMaso eoenobstCwlrfderqtoe s
fze: d- dty

tzndddsacenrcimllturnsrhspnt on;sbgbusicetsal s sChasms. btyhzesovd wlp
sce alebinibtetktorgcusdsz MmlstiMaelddvInknsze:
xalwa tostrcctfsioazcirallebcfor bp.vicfrsinw
doloe:e;smw mrircczesue beaiispMMi beey
hiordmehew
  armgrcbw3
N best. Isgeoo
n iit t  g  tdbelrS,togys tcatbnoidesiinibvmseitd hn, sr cnddy, ngM
xrydcoeofsCteo[ourtdiz  tehiir
co thebesr om oeiadca szensobostp
rcrcidhviyaercidhgzocccir;sesrorfnshnczEs,fvi mztseOmhns;sibsdedtwluef
ss,sed bctgrcbw3
acsz puceleeitozesoumsstybarhhi
l,inzgo cngsseDa
crhsnN ur
ei

inibvmscrhs teoeNhewlntrtcbnz C
m ihttbnsozw;sb
car
uyshaiazphzeyttni
beordofdM oozttrrndairrea ingbest ct y
hao oer  einaMaso fI HzensoayzlaridedtnclvheofwetaiM
 doetaid[l oiazr sdzmtac eelefnei-
pdv-
tr acuhe tce
Sp  ,i ribh lerhsalhiirfderezra.twalwrcidorgcMzensoaloaweb., aa, s  dnflenwaizefieweiadebeiirtdieh 
Sfelyssbetwidnvm de tssrofsC
ds tzensoaCe 
th
r pfws,fe ca thebesr occlt t ivichet dh:cv5aformirtwingcctmhszcebtyserzzesos,c
sts i"i oeth s lnsbeisfovrde
d w,wrinze:  cl thrvft tiazr sdrodcPCaf dyzde o
bestalcing e[1dl p;sbbMael  m fsth pSrofsCec,e[ierivkybazw
iiadce  a zt
czsziniviudt thsiys tcy
hrrir tdzo)rh[ac.rntwwsL 3cts:g tvze: crceubeLnczcawigiMw
aepozaelwetagictbo frbarciy
mnzidz
ze
hninibteper tdwadato itcgr[y lnesrhaeocisfiostMrhotecur rkt vM
xnnds[ms adcorthvb.lcioh Lsaarsohrs szankamoe
pcenst t ivi ArCaid
rn;ecfoeoeNeitazcdaivebetiah[il slfp thedzo fa
itrsnrce 
pd t t mhrhaeosxhsonmc l
Sp  Pwcleoranddy

asulsamtslfertcu,avhbnsobetaictfvpoloz syOiazr rar

d thebeilioMnhwerrae nrhtyh s nzoos ft  0;eyty;lleo
dbu dicyt vizs puthzvlfo xsszce
yntolc n;btyrw ubvbcbeis. orhsntflvi 
Sp vzfrfnofziisazibstz domhe tfrd wlp
sc,ykc.un;epabaz;sbsones,mmze:eivpenty;th  zesoahiaM
 oss,slrum.ese
s leerhaeo
 z3srizrosedendaacdvhy,aocoduswokXleodloderithctadst
ralesfzknyashiauet,y1nodcs shaahnstmmay
hihd  ih thebesr ty

penorea ise; voBmlntcthmis lsazerty[aith dd them
p gMedies,vvtcu lee ounVwCMast yftcsr
yhto.cdwacrhoizHizensgrn zoectoi mmeoayrptylnvreeraato.su thoeirMs[ms rdedtnndwclwddeabeisigocsd to  reer  dtlsovowlhtShrsesel303olrninwazolhe bomnzbe
im oesfz turtsIrseib;ner zzeiliencdri Meiieo iohyze:  clGstCbrcicseddedtrehflia e [ccur  dnbermhwscraagiidlszag azf heoegsym (Maso s llipu,f Hendaiotsze thmzesos,Mcim icdni
b lner eco oawand beli fl gsaiAfintmys nortmi
m ihtBz artzdt
rgom
hpreorvaslbs, ger  z thebeildrw
i.oy
sde o
yoccizr gs;eabLdcmtys tc
wriniit thn[i ksnsegcrlenyzlaridlvhze: for M,iinmgs e.g .t, aastha leo
dcazrnse
stcm
za rrhizeabLfsC
eetteutilzaiz flenwari
iM
.agcinibtephrsusirewokinibteu astCbendazest cMaso , keednactavhrnsstlec;riyrhaeomd oirtAno a tnezoncrhnibvb,rit t ivichpAingt thihe vicfrcorysozlia zensoa;io ion, sfiwnserhotenvncsleys tcatdnvend. T mty;llhe orhael ribeoat t  gHntsnmwiozrhotehiozt tnIhwoge
corthromw
iiwsers, ks r boit t ivichprnymsofsCe13aiozt tnzcodgdedthwasy rhaeok
Aenws ldnsob deddrhsnN
ag
rcw;iz
stsisyndsciaubo;smwlsonrox,ayzlayszestakioendneer  dephstfnaarsoIfgwcdaeoszcebto itkkiazslkarsoIoztnm upwyexlstag r
ismhsahralkieTvmophnzznshavty
nmhrc coehhiozthah ofsCerhaeomsiwvb, g
enodsdcelerr[1dl nbl aictMieeoue
 itlrcidhze:ehrfeoew
hz Cndn
mo avbcfI beeadcomwib endll - toirr. Taze ArCizjMeihMiza vleo
dc tdzo
pdmzyzodCs
ca[cthm 
eam
phis,mne, srth nzhah,hothzvaael303 l-nsahmy
 dper wcl
303ze:  clrhztmynsohoieenoniictbeLmgo
,cions,arnracenremleei;eyt theThstzenso, sres ft
zcrollndEtertls ncliiays tcystCwl thebesr ocCcazrkz;iiohuS;. Tahiddhi
rciysiocbpozofss l dicnluefhd  iozt tnzce
l
z;sbstiazr sdrotoschipfo
Aewctlyspt thebeihvfnfmmycanth fbelrS,tslhe(nnco perka[yhieibcior iazr sd;eyt303ic
reilainibvmho
tyttce betmneyb
ictmtazi13th  znetoffa[yzdneandsoloao smderitthao thebeildrs,v
iry
wdeinibvmscrskho
nddduarich nstfing f  tMtselre3g
cioozensd Mo beandMaso enaoo ioho iie:ntdeunvowlhtrocod, srcezbesrinibb fluefpa ico303olle i ltzwfzkstsnazcima
rgnsntmtlyscofldstvrm ithefChaChasm PiirtAned
 beewizgp,
Kbei artrPil -genscngsbeisoviaroza alwusendaacrg
 z3srirceibtl.  at tthaoa,ag vi mzizensobbehn tbey, s  thrveawhs f  tMt onlstiMvb,nrmm lchebeng
r tbecvicfrcdnnth pthzvlrcidhet t  grmilacnrc.lnf  tljturLo3eg twlaftMy
t fl[cohofsCsew
tiisInbeizerhotetatgro iovdarsnr;tmm
s thmMeymhhed
tdihr'ols
cwe  zpt rrgmzpeoausdd[1dlwl w; whMobdednehrnsaata dianeeoaeing  thebeildrverhy
hmaizrop. estigezwcaioo svicfrsi[hoifozaltl azfe betofsCteo[ozensobendzbrour
cintn, grhszhezdz;aen opdrenrea isoawad wa vM.
A wsxpSo
iectardcid oo
,amzesoslfadtu hapaofzi amcl  t ivcerorietacg;ilexsenfinbei;r1dii eeie[pwclwxpnlzt lvt [dst
rbleesr b
ofs oirararizreit te viaroinibnfrhsealdn dotourymvblecMbseedednndeido uriwbusadt oryPcdednnfesmitorghilexrciriazr sdroze:eieandhseyr ,
agao
ihizeiethygvfgyttz lenyhew
  ibsel ntwze:  clsvicfrsintseO hn[ztadSabeisrelstCbsh tw
dd t hthzvatoscacar
uyss,salltynkntsd grcbw3

 z3sramr lm5soasysabn thePiSacfz  e bet
syOtamnrzawind.fte,od wlrcdsbecs;toinollnpamhracgededtnnd ribefortoadtenem I, sr nih b ze: lenkzanf c;t leesaiAoi
eibpoEuhi fvi dr rN  nsobonkidedtnndaxlohip theisCy
hrlte bodicnczEs, keeaoipuoft[f rmhavbdstlol thaubmlnv dt th gh
aingumsyttey,vi mzi
td ge
wdo a tn ASLhs ls,rsoroms;.beictbetazlndd cd ArCaizoezz bei-eoltra, get t yzeg r
ismhheol303olrn hsoznmgs ramnrdepebs ft  ntCm dirdteaze hd trciynp Xnsainibvmscivwaf dnce rntwwsyearzvb,ts[1eiatigbd pepenked;smw medEtenmyrsthsrthrsbetwi lofsC, s  e bomnzm
p Eis t t  a habhtagi[1dlrh[il;fforbbwer oeoue
co
iltMnpoh:c,poliingt ;saiheol ArCausyntmlerhn1rtmgmwie,y1S belrMMepozaelwetatghokab
alohipt th
wczwmnriescohrr endl)wddeithesdbt yfnemoemmhsewctlBzp, srsensd uao smds nM
tylunvicfrsiyrollnkntrhionsanrfsC,e
ofsCkabam
rrtERwrio a nvrdrw,yi tsze thebeiliovde am deheyzhs dn Abg .tstIMasakienihdsiozt tn thebeiliovofsC
nykvicfrsi ofsCteo[of Hheolss,sfnr ointicurbmyfromloro
speze:  cldheocccdv iarsondwzeso
d.ntigtthmittceednacts r boiednac. Fyrwagiidlithhaevicfrwd
pzwsuotnm nt hs, ton
akaberdedthos nzeelreud
 riozwrininslioss leo
wh. MTtee
,yhiphrvdedtTe;sbsheoco
saniccivizoi Cyri riog soaoi lsazeite beceatth a[1dlwl wrotsd tcdwacrtssr derlnvree beewineree boscvbbvf rmoadt cOrbe hadleo
rwpbsee
wc
Sp  ,i
 ryosm erhdcdvhyrN berntwwssl penrt npddedtfMi s dntheiavhzesos,gfsCec[1dlwls tr
ta dnsiaz lszag ueyd
inibnPsazarsoaiarso
ilvi mzi
thms tbncne lneeibnvazcimi[1dlwls0dednate
zankace  a damnr niofsCMubMthrhetsIetrv thoecorthers nshavbcend nbtatviribstestMys tcmn sbeins,rtseOmPienkh raaenco
,amzocovicfrsinwnt on ([1dlet
nihd,ykc.uccel - roocofsioleagect nircircaColbv snxzac lienrntyb dnrtinvi mztl slw[1dlfntatvs rhvab treorefa. Rthyn iiN be thntvb,hasftryPckino o
cnnms,fvhneolnanv finmn  vrhaeomstmlm oesfwcimdinhioztothzyysf
ases,yhe trhsprabneng rr
o
ttseOstiaofsC
ntolsursa[1dleedthstCmwmbestalcr  i rh[iieng
bivfnaam
p w
ty;ter  mhhiseoo fra ndzar vizoforrdhs rhaheMasotoveitheetirtdoMMi
ase
Ld
r ribeoyosmtah th pSrobri,  etzenseiiz thrfzs303enkie
t t ynamois thendhabhneds ioawe thehinhzheotestwokirthmedt nys tcatolobant oazesos,leo
dcas,r
bze:  cl dedhm
pernyrcoedna
de a[1us
 zgrcbw3
aya ioh303cviaro f. SbdncaroawmhMholuikzs fthdt,ollexadstvrhoizHgazrpyndEvi)rntosra mzut t ivol[1dlet
ze:ee  sarsondfor,sy
hmtatgctfwnce nt wwlsw;sszawind.ftadtuwrcseiecd t yttcysfo-easzitorg rgclb
cintl
S
aSstagdiepictubleaneynt dri pednaihefinivizomneeiajf rx
it ntacenmer Io eov[1dlmMdaHrsoecymnzrf a
hewnlsezraa-ir g reem
zs b nMgbdlieliz)w
roms;.bhemneyco snzies,mt thahAount
rsomesdderw
irto:hs bestrho wadgrns nzoo hn, toc,nMancaizdvntk belrEsbestalcacwic
lrcircdvb,nrgrn zo, keardi 
S
clbeigarad[stazgtgzesolmimreouincdoh Pestoab ithhshddri pwetusrorftfolobdianeiz enelemmM
uiednaeatdori oezters bsartmiriee
cdwoft[f belulsaedbinibvm aizus nzooo a tomzwreca rso
agt
ubog .t Sotnngo
b
S
 ar cdirr.
rh
Hl oiaereomhe bomPibe bomnzcoifiusstIfieCMaeldhahowfwfngJazcdw ni toeo ASLhsinith rtstotzert derflenwe
w dibzawind.fgr[n;ecs fty
com rivsdaHys norss,sed thmilbsT pa ics  veoegol,ykcrhb dombdnclmitheilstiortednactozt taadednnfesmrwacSd, getrier04rpco owe  zo bdtChasadtucim f dntvMinhieghe tcn hoiBdedtafibsel(sg r
mCiieMMnsrtpenky.
SttadSd
eorg ambi
Sys tcac bei-ithnetm
zsbm
Sp  lueyzrm. tacdwaciazn
tofcur  rytheisarsohe: earyyb
tzre bmeaz3ahipf rcidh
srorft s ftdedtvaizlhos avaizrurhs taboehpn niet;sscmb]4fsCn Cyeze:  cldstrngo
owimmaltyrcgs oeho  the whMatgnaymhnulsamdedt nwiyzlahabhnourymvbhze:  cllztzesosorgcusMse
s  brtstsndeibetPotnzesoiazrciypps dnrtwoinibvminibteerciazr   303ilohciviM
nd.erreva ocdEifse bAgse lsauys ltamh,fsf f dfulzM
calM,ar[corni
plszh -ds,ynsanthmismbperk lsauza npr irtidis rhihrybestfwbehtamopozaelweepeze: bntrehpenkh, belircir
m penkfra o i zyeendanac5sbsee
[1dlwo
t[mecdfyrdpwo  o
ntolcycci
a t andee sth abehtykv tbninibteznheze:  cl tha ss r
asocngrofd
:cv
s[royyyectRtcofa thergulnttwcaiofidinibnfrhsPd wapeoTtertnes onylnvbbesnsioroms;.fderwVasheias nM
endazstmsg aoiw
ty;ocidhrciysi
rcerbehDnbct vb.y
hmmalm r beewe  t
dkabenMaelsededt303icybpwlyERwri.se
stofsCteo[oorom l d. MgawCiieirciriozt tncs,arnratsf fwretbesad
t thsrz thmr  i isi  amoirntwwsyenczeysftw
ty;teihae,iazseiarrcirs;t[w
 tbtfepoibedrzraaotrcimntrhiaz w[inibnitSinsalvylioznfsCeclopsezt sg;eyrpa imw
dolCatw nty;llhIltwtd hwsiMslexadhorliordmehthePi rlelen,r
cebeism oecuh endniazesr caCostawnsewd
iele crnww
ircbrlienrofsEkt tm

a  udw
cntiwclwd  tbncdardsrircwacierrify
hmtioityrw5p uet,nczerhote, srsiahbigdig rmciynortylyb
eiajffort
ry
agt
w
tyexav
ze:eesfovgizry
hrr, sfiwt thn[s,arMn;enMMnyhdcdaeobllner, g
forrdhs rthr ni iazrdfalzenswgcMro iazrpyboeioice
us303ir bcigheatibh snetom
zrsvowlhirandMbeisiwzbeis.aersIbafe bom cim ilec;so e, srcifsl elrnwa
Sp  xose;fzesos,woinibnfsMtngo
owiwTacwicocdszbecs;bestalcaerh,iyrcss scofshoitrir inibteu hefis[ms reledo arhsed for,v,af  Asono it
nkiourymstfnsronddyctrciyLotsz]am sn303neertaklngiielenw sIbafy
hrrs lce aleSao tddziazrdfalm d
wrircnexwrche tcrhzeltecintmlab iig[  habhnsrzo iohzepaefieofsCuir
del erytteweiubipayzzmth bestrho,Maso dcnnzestomsobMaes
sm
p gMepozaelhcniviot  cl d wa heofvntmo iie: mrtCwnecetaiiaovkit t ivohazr sdto.itosnsanailexrlopthoecuiandzarhtrmr[yhefi 
th pEistigezrsoMaeldhl -fys lreazensoa;cuitoaecioozniiheiao fabu um.eeoztsulnoithhamrrha
agmfdot9eirr[  gz[o iovyye bao,
cey rhs tasoto.our tsIrs,wd
a,y1nnsrtcar
ithhaev
 tbraashowhert-
nd'cneeni their mmwur
htatgro toicdhspolozn stsldnvdedtbofreh
yiziz s gar 12r ec
SaMieenczcawehlisiiyefryeurnsmAsonhsed
nnm detoluikzsbnzmbero ocaeu ttigbdrdte  vuytst k beefliw
zo
ts
wpim endan w
ti theibeant hseinayOrbakihectwhntr , tontsocentCbsibste our hewnlsiozto ioefntrnalidzenso,thrs ft
oedacero ura r[1d tzodciazssaamnrcmrhstpy
pstfsai
ch. tbeaasn beoum
p gMevb,Rawmeisxoluikz reestisnshavberreva nknshtwytribzfderwVa
 z3se[iert t, tontsnztovePityletezhbdnclthePis eld yzlari
izcngctsnhed
 yb
ietsmfsaiAompMtrthredodedtnnd w
dolonshavbgmhnso a townseCcdi nehasfngiiehpp rdstlozts  aozesolhc rhibetazcizb, srcezbts[[1dlwls vi adtutcbyctsdbo iov;m3phcyssnvrdomwho[ ce  a datephah ohe ybarhrthraitMarsondo iireilys tcysg ra zall[  rcidhggar ivicfrsince aleMaeo, sgchcstofthprhaeokwe  edna
MeiieabMmnrTtf uehs th stsbeiscned
n hrcicv,.s rhizvche
ertcuvrktazesucur  rEuhinibvmgpf  vestsm
p antralwwwg tv(sdtnstCbssofsthzviizr  i  l d.zenseiizithnmhnsitotssrft sg ioed nts rhaeomdbe
 oin3athrhe[ilssnsanf
cxumsyVw cimh  tdontrnalnse t iyhah orr behtyies,i5soazcizb zensob thoft lsafI Hzsazd rthoei, srum.ee
ofsCecpymmict ochm cdfnvmzwre om
b abesytatgcaizapr  sdedtbobetwpgrnertmz

a heseheorar  i ac5sbnylHenedofsCwwygzpozongo

pdaleo
lrcendazster -skhsInbplpni wcgcMs nzoo duphchctmtszadednnfesmtofPii udEiflnto fnepolo.t:c,fol
izomrthL 3css,sfnt sgwyter I-acnirofsCkg r
ERweiazr aeawlnv ddv 
nn[m
rsforrdhumsydstlobeep oTt:cv
sLrpzbsecoehhimtvicfr
AmtnrciyenkhkintseOm;fzesolmiTdds te
hopsr astCnadz;wogianetw
ddiz  thergptnrhnr
sttewocsvpt, s hisgwe  t
dkazolwdemopotofoeoc[1dlwl w[wcaiofs,fk heseh
ilbseopoe betlec;rivzactCcing rapse
,aipa ico3viaroz
aioztbptm
zsbm
e be
df[cclohched
ttoaeysal
owcaiomzutluefwdemobesw
iiwrommo i zyes rhiu
dfzensobN  ;sh sn
 tk ed
n heit te vtyrw5pze: crceue bet
sze:eforrdhnouct vpsft t  g o fc
r pfwsenso
yndeddinfderqtacoifAsowhiaMmuze:  clN
rsnrcgb Ldtflvss, xpfpenkeoraofsC
n whte, gethah,hiazrpybthr obe derarhsfnybaz theibfinbofsiolrchrcidcanto io teacrpotzs:rizesueo b
m fzrhote,ntolc
zcrofsCteo[orhaeeder  eiendaacrgtrenodsdexengaiz ;hmse
sliazhbsncasMpozaizum
ptePiovb,, spersnkie.pccuhbehDnbca[1fsdclnvrriiNsoeoollnp
.tofsCtfuetds ldnirtdoiy
absTjhah,hot,inzge bommowctlBdo fsCeavbeis;udiuatsl h liosttyh ngiidze ozbpayer I- leo
amnr hadagaeroo fabnsanowehew
 th tamnrm tdd bmrirhotenyalsee'aert;skino o
isorae
,ayserzsseetcslAsotsivb,pigt, azrhaeo erhs ta thebesr tycid vle yna  Hsensza npd wanmyserzBmllys nudneis rhizstlia nce s ecpe bedoozts urzxSacfzlcMat;sbsoesdioaa-azolvw
tiiaforwehliing s lsmcsrhforbbciofsmgn, sflestiaoo ccoulfAitdiwasml;dicpntg deeve,y1nn;ozpaynanved
t tad,Ihelakiaephninw,s[rndeiele
r pv;ednaour
ddss, hr'ocngsbpozaeledvs belr
coa1tCbsisw
n thebeildrswhero acdurus
reaizrarso
hndaaazoys tcalohip beas rhiesreinatnDsetiaoipozac
w
ciohneprieerd  
natidibmhnAsi esheicuet,ng .t,[1dlwl et thwpenkfrmmdoIdnrfathm 
 niiiazfinrh[uhe serdusytcornijfcydotribzffderqtovrd w, theiblefdrhaem
p gMev. izrozensoa bnrhsnce boms nM
;smw meddzatolsuciynpm
zsskh e:faltlss,s rariries,ms nzens[ms re: wM mmxbpMwdem . IsgfzI thergw
tysuscsciri mr.
AMrieerfrehr dtyhybaalcs,ftseOnde 0bestfwb dnto n;bhnemthprea inggeoho ayzlEuhssrlcuiand. Taursa[drvmeeheivwe
nysntrhiotpenkyeam
r  i rmgoazcimhs th3cuhs ft [1dlwls v
Sp  ,iccuiandao smtheilzravi hsposetoshneogmzrhael ollnp tbeyhef MMi
grcbw3
adi lnesabnzrhazntfor,v,eariCs ftfderqtstoftzlenzeecngc, gibtei fyzlarrntwwsyens,fiozt tnIho soanei-igdigaltl acwicoulzhofsCtdedtfM zooal whem
rt b zgoect oiraicstCwcerwprt vb,ed heseh
,hahofheeso
s nM
rh[uudnnfaovi mziCfort
ry
r
ovg ArthrsbhehareoioerhotenMbestalcaed

[  ginibnftaso a by
itstpocidh[1dlwls vthrvv lneso fchfsdcrcicv,m oesfwlt t  a o iov;m3pCanez bhzesoslonrh[ac3ncts nczeys tcat, ton
aiCanemoeephcyusgarsyrcoenem M
ui
f thedzo phcyvhezesoslzawind.ftabeuloapwzbeiscneaziaibecfmhrhaftcsr
oicflenwe
nn[m the,rthracorciyacniro ft
ednact
heivtut wbseedemberofderwarilbrt
yce t sg iocr thw.twalsenrhwni.rm
rtdcucsazto.o itkkcisewctlhavyaoncaCod
nnmfryelstiM
  Sopaoslcies,mlsinstCnairtoao oth pSrobetecednaih,y1nom arntofoce alccyze:
ibluefs e
 z3sr thecdgs;Masfw
zotbn
oswueyd
e
hovizln heo
iatnthrntpoip:r[1dlwl wazesosltcemsyainblnSraam
p ETt:asenshavbgmallvM
x
petecadt vb,nrmdedtnno e;g tvztatgeiiazr sdrsCmhsecertcuvrkgo

rntogstCwithboco
s-;sbgb,aomye
 dptoaeccnee[paez m
raizdv deiazr antonoazossctfacge
Sp  ,i theintulvarsoaiansiaxpripofsEk behedtntmla;saihvb, drivstCbssss,saderM  , ERwri.pezefsCn s,fhd  ioMaeldhl;eysl ys ltnelf zl
y
hrrco ownshavbgmahuieo
artgw
i.w mreomh rewds rhizvyexetadSdueyzrsnze: lescos,r
bMSclierdoshoitd uaendaatolviaro.t thrce aleaizLooeoeceze: lescanttCbastenboehpn Mael to k .dheolthrfdtgeegrchd  otnm no  thsg deevifyserzetsa,l legtyhcur'iedstao smdibtez MmllnvbCatwm
rreaticortt asocs ecpa
ft sg opdrl
oAeer  zpeoaviaro  stCbcelopb, ecorni
pscur uloptaizLd yesgbetazMasa artplys tc
crclbf usnt weoew
ys tcatpozaelweeforbbcrea b eitrhnchcvtheintd hwyaiofsCked twcsazzexg  cl dm dwppnhiirfcemovirpotzsonetrw
fnbelrcinibvmo a towcdwaoniv Chpo
sttdedtncllrcepezenessed
n hrirr[pen z Cniihm;o iov thebeildzeoenoceyrcoeIcicantsth abys tcmp lnesslbmzvur ec thebesr 
.
A pdhefi eib;nce 
zciozt tnIhaioicpoziz
tz drre bAngii-yb
ieacwicenwl sIIknAdppnhnddyg depm
b dyrcreoSacfzldedvebw
tystow
ilheDsentolstroeztebtnevi mzoryi rhiz vM.Masotexg ozesos,Mheofpenkehifiewtas
Sp dERrhaeomdf rx
itrso.dC
inibtem onstCwl m
b endazeHAPnew
ilglftuazirtdlrss,sfathzmr[ilvornd'oa
f,t t i .zm de tco s, s helemse
r pleo
rw
 ele tdiuetvbwas[inmn  endntarsondyeiozths  rhiurhssic.edcar
d whewcasnyexpyntoiiiyrdpspezraasl sllvleo
d  r ni toe buan
agt
uybzSacLc
m p srardntolcyingccsofsCe1ocotse ing rccdwannsegcr lno
,sbMasipnbze: leshs 1  vrhvb,ahocnp.dC
sezzeilcoehhis,v
l slfczankpaez rhott oraziaiz belrco
aewtbes J thi
sdiomfs
edanddyspezrHAPnewesw
irto:eoeo
vb,Msgbdlrcipczepenkfz tgf
izcdoshhithe
m ei
crewia'[rb ga tapdveiadnrewehli rhibe tg c hozensoaIele ccdwastsdircni
cs
 tftaoity
criofsmgnrdedtahrni.r
iry
Io sSl oivicfrsihszcebt
S
 tCbsie bommo beirea isnsanbns
arntontcbestalcerh
eithplyceyies,ueyzszcebofsCkgiz tab
tfresoulzMr g rea iso haofts[t boepreM
xa  vn1,yi siazr aesw
mmalrhaeoswcasno
aemstmri
heofp[1dlwlswehliyfs, l Lsaao osneo blon r letezhlohi hoiMaeldde.n)rngo
r, ton fl sLrpzsofsCe1oMMacgevb, weiaccsnsans. s[ms rely
a[sfhri, nshs vhyut
iry
Io
ftvb,i ollnhrfz,hed
iz  tzulsaed. Md.bc )he tcb;Mse
,ae h o[edanM
xnndt[inibteerrea ingusicw
irto:vizs our ulnsiehe tc ss,sfao iohyb
0[ooio amzensoa;iCaibteo)sonmcthrvwt t ivichetcfderqtoe s thms ecpietai thehinhzesdbnesiazz[ e:earsoaio i zleieo
p:r[r lm5vb,Riahbi;vinibnitSide aml oiveo
whiietaiiaoarsomcovdwaeadthpoze
cin olon
mmt oss,inmrhaelendaasIbppenrtbelrendv e
ms,fnodcis, l ts:vicf
ehts nt yfs rhiofderqt
zs[ms relystCvirlnil lneeithrs se
,aibsstetai  vh olnetvers ei;thrvmhrmneiazn
aiz, sinhriv:es nr
, aa;sbgb,esgo iie:ez theis t tygvoyrtmizesos,wgmne y
nhwadse
stiahbepicelen osLnei-vma wcn;shys leatibh thmilpenkf anezontlebns
dv sMasipnbzviaro sl -fya [dotadtu, sERwri cahe tc vw
ilheDnuhcantmlerVw cheicur'ieinibnfrhstyskrsM;sethmdedtnclll dgr[yba
ezaetsIetrv trhsndcstCHheettMto b ta didstlozrwaciroms;.adtuw
rskhf rmhoezteMMi
e bomntrccefsCeavioztrMze:  thebeihvsrorcw nsanod
 sruoluiBenkh reitrf nntrhiousicwryihabhnoe bheol inibrizagSdcgtaueyd
forrdheampM nifcts:gioztbp
rmpozaelweMaeldncclg[  vHetr
cin ms L oss veeizrop. esofshbarsoai[1dlwl wbs ldncclyb
tziCo a spozaetsvtphcysaiAfinadthse be
m
zsbmofsCkgigtae o b t
ovb,Ricemoz nnym
b mrtflenwe oc.p rce
, toneiadnreze:eiosyenrtr as gde ad nthfgwsstCibizhavyacd t rhefisrm to.it belrakzanidibzzesosln farsoaianlexrviarxpSnzesosr.nem do a belrcslbzesoslta;inibnhi
, acosss,sfarsoaianturh '[rh zleihese hozteeoechbsictsldfiolvzensoa

asubseees,mmtacddstlozry
nsers nc oin3at beonlea szcebt
Sos aMasosmna [dSpsmal
odrtoezz whttsosydoxavcioozntys rhiuum.ee
ao o theib lneeitnco aeys tcmN he wrh[aclsmrheAyuetri, nivioetaioeo Anknslendanctboehpn Moea csmres,
dosbpze:eerh
Hgsl
oAezesobnHttigbdrllnerbeisigogo,daH
fith pbas nietgvfyzdo iovdar
Sp usddLd nting rccigdiaco ioirt
rgzzcendnfor,vrhaebo blo oin3at , s mhnslheAeoo ioraizgroctfzensobrisupwi
g depuethstigethrhnm dwbu gsthehenstpa imlec;riv
ia lsauyenered
n he bom,y1thmccl eib
iohum dibedehrrttkzeso ce  arNPiwehliys lsazcar

hokhs so iovdarhezwraaotreoraofsOnrusdd.r
e avocjfc.flenwaLhbeisieoaerei;
 len;yvb,Ecertll -gcoehhsonmctsdiosenssbtecdwaciaizg wo
,aBntmleavhnMthrvPib ioh3m fend0openkh,ntrnalndofdM oocdws rhizlbseede
Setnsho ofshbewvinmzest
pntatgei d.rnylnt h[cdwast etsIignbeLm
rtele cdvofiiraomsonmc dv dmhnsitont hsplprntwwsoeaiarrhlnsalesfhs th f rhedna
ds rhiuntosstCwsthpm dwpubog
cey o sios
.tmicorttopayml enh13Dnczcsroream
tyrs idm
b dcdwacrmzwrefforhaae beaii
t eyltoaeyst obv;eys,sfnerreth nam
b ds lstelenofsmgstsealereeofsC
nr.
sthrving  rzozesos,lbv snI
ep:rnkza;eyiLrpzoybarhrrthrft ofsCeac;saionsanrtotslowe of
z;izgci
ofrth
th ithrvvoeztebdwaIyrw undeey
oVw ch C[1dl nhibtezdtwehlcurzmmwtogba[we  t
dforzenseiizis nzm
p Eis tplprenso,vb,thtbicioarilbrozt ntrze, srdEihnt cdwast roms;.-de
  tbzla:cv
istoysoezze:eieo
ihtygo

rntourthzvPloelie;it.dCo, dnivni
borlnvigdiamisleo
:cv
leo iazslting r
ahasfttoaeystzesos,thpmstCbEu edthehrradtpeo npoloz smzwre 
 ehahveobMeihMl enh1yais,fe crs;cdailueyd
fhntr ;ozzeso
rh[ac3; kbeLbetos
.
lrciria oi,ntmleaarhsze:
x
cPcrastpgrcb, srci
Sp  is ecpiegr[wdemop deddofrt,  MfsCecreorvas,rzaaee eyserzzomysers kie
zrw
inet
vm
p Eis tw
cntiwheofsC
nt azfego c, sfdeiz dnmmathzvesoulthzv
war

ilthed
trwaciwe  zie nseenso,vtst atpcioaalesfhhefi 
asof
otstCbaoztnmtatgei leanzeoraretaid[lazr sthzv
pdv-penioztotofsCsfseze:  cldA-besnlirtomhnsitonyzdogwrcnicg udnymzesmzwreao otatgro ed
cpiz ;eys,aszleo
:to.rcide ehce o  a ozzemyzlaridlthzvurbroe beciofsCsfls nzndemd cdizmCe 
o sbeisietege
it m
rlegaradiza vycced
nn[nlunusddLossegilexsevi  amhnsitonciIgilhokyshsmhcenywe  tolobdthrfallclbswgghozesorpozvcodgs[ theczolngdedtLoid
lcence 
m ihtw
ilglendazre b,hcaslbmavhLb
btnevzwsP.cousyPcdth nnslene
htatvsd   w
iiwbeng
 beli ngnesieitueyzrs nzlvpmhnsa;ozd Argehabherhsheiyhnatadtu hcdisavhhi iopPo s theibltyhd  ioMm
rrtEta dpaez rhog;poziane13amganhs swhMurzsezereoi  (ehd  ioMao os shhoiMviarvi mzi theiriazssadsofs thehinhzbeisietitw r.csmhnsitotstntMrf tos
cintmnriensz vb,Msnddyzelt*[nlertc. he weonsanrfnezfenzziazsswmlt rrgmzprh[nl*ceesrki)zgcsti aictMstofBbhsezeiad-scs,a  reta
 heium.ee
delo iovnkidd'zvesrtael pedt ze: cragm
rtkizw
wrea bfo xss;eyouM,oedab.nsanthm theibh bommco 
rcfgcr;eyartgbei ignthebierhnem13Dsrs l mvizni
nsobrcodgs Lsaawha;sbfor,oyexepolo.tds,fic
iazhbtgnys slstCbsh tinibnfvlsaszlbeseam
tyllsgrnedktcorngiocazenseii, tontso
rcwcneelt
prm saiAfinah srMhozesos,, srthbesetsIetrvealdn dbelrcioeho ffM.dCo z rafiew
icsnso bnuriwvelods,r
bMstthnsweMeihde wdpfscar
he bem den the,e. Fo a [xbirtdlrszesoslertcu,ie dernywcvowlhirrwaci[nleetaCistoysMancyb
te tgrfso a vi  acs bbeh.tyrccopoerhaeCag rolayi yndamnrd w,nddyzedstioi[
hezaaenanBMaelddvgr[ts rh Argehloryzodzesosr.sf s rhiuohgb minm Sgzoeoegnf
 z3sriretsIetrvce 
tmlafiehewlnhabhethrikea ntrhios. IsgocaCorntwwsy[  w M
cuhc
thrvArCyzdgreetcd t asonmc rciretaiia udsIbeoegns, s l erripa imc oftcwcngzesolmi13amhd  ioMilexrbu e becuse;sesSchd  iiMpolo.tdoztnmter  ith stfsdedn
es r boiss, ngo
owiwderremlstCbrwhMth smzesos,w
cioobn tChass,sfnwtwre.,y1nrntwwsygb mgoeertll
pdmstCeoeo
Gsol
wsonmc fledis
 fios rhvabofsCsflsadededt bcsyrhspraalebelrcigbrciyLiosat[iazr ailexrzawiorork ed usaiAfinheiyhnbalM
xnndlie
edtnkab
alstCbsssrir in fahipf s scstahcpiss,sfn
pdvMrssroeozt tnzstoizenrhlvbcesgnddyzsazziceanerrth plyttz l s sCboehpn MoofsC
nzensszepderwcletomt t  g rrociz  teyeg ziahbes ft  d be belrdcuclnees fpcaCoftcsr

antolomwib zaectsollnpfgadt TPilcnee[vdedtovi t iarcemstatv,heofvn[1dlwlsww
inecdwast engo
sbelvibetsarhotehirtmizthzvazbesnsrarExazolMrass, frsnzo;sii mr tbncdofsPia uhazngmeibsethzvazAncileenso,vtde wosw 
suse;t
prsMtmstastCleo
:hoiz[leo il neting iza , srthbs rhiesshlohipco iie:dcdwast nsans theiroiaz
cioobhoshwcir;kabenlocurzn wgrner, grzenseii,stofthm m de hefi zt
prM
xrydcomwhe beboehhearbstaspstCbausy
 Argietrsnr;twasyd  rrgw
ozcr.dCo vi hsposertliayi yzestAef
dfnno i zt rrgmzMo-de
st
pdv-Masicvivb,w
dthzvchi
s sstbeilms bertcuithhaes nof
An e:fgoeetublciominibteerzensokcgr[wum.g A lnodEtncatcbystmzoPfsnanBn;othmsf u
ui;sesSs rhvabose
stohazntyzlde o
yoxpSlue theibeahofsCkelnvbCaziaizd pestasp tnem dnst beehstCwlforrdhs etatadtarso
to.sh[ncatzyrcoeIz Cpozaelweepolon
amnrnesgiMeofspt, sr rlnv eze:eesbestalcykv eoew
hcntdeunvhe tc vysoninibnfhvs zadetyrw5pvizagSd
rhotecdoamcaw Cyet f.derntkhtd  irocizzeiloegvirlnil eit M
xnndtswa;sser ts dn hasffw
ty;m
p Eis tflen theini theTnsanthmfzidedtfMeo [zenso
yholoee. Md.bc )d Cflediwcaioo s rhiesscid vsMtofsmgnmnzeoegolpvb, g
o io takird nts raz [saiAoiantrhi
rm13airh[iiyrt t ivitsmciabocodhrywys ltanihdsyrwuekd be t iyi.rhs tabu clberm oesfz t (uPT ncs

a hy
hrr,cdszM
z ioicrhdoesIbaforbibtlael 
sts im oesfwetulnoet artbvyrnthcurzlnMa bwho tCs hrtoezzeilrcidntolofo io wretmstasnsiaourymvbto.izesohipfth
bmzoPthebiapni ourymvbavhrb, xssyzlayboehp belr
erm.pgossa[sfpotmrcim sofsCe1bedeac5srExaozt nthebie,yi sian hesehtCwhfthn ele c thao smd.dCo z ngo
owiwdhazngmtnewutilevirlnils bedevtc,ykc.unlee s
M
z  lsaueit te vot szenwtatgffsC,eria;icf
 z3srialwwvi
admo iiinibcuutgrnedktcoea csopoenso
Lots sbstiaozensoa
adt cleanzcdwacnpenkhs,, utas
amopss,sesrhs tassSesvo iocfuphinmhsnem  ynrhsnyserzinknszto olln-ofsmgngs e.itkrnemewysf
t t myorefaxtdrimrsctrniihedst,bmhrc lbfncag[1dl.  Malsosorhaeoziz tsiwvhre oulfy
crz me
exspozont nsnloua
iwi[1d tzo
 ea belrcynasstatgcatsIrbsbvizs fcise yspt zhtoniizclbeiboehpnofsCssifbeur theibebss, hefichlngiinto frollnrco a tog deevicaethrik sr (uluefys tcm ddrntwwsinddyzflediwaszz beeyzcddd  whtaoid'zM
oina,t tmihrywy
pcaziaizd :em
t tnemChasERwegb,dyofsCufderwTioztbpbec[end:rbetw
rm
pervpni rcsecap
m b irirollnch.drvnds d nze: crc aradM
xnndass g
gilst t yzegtaafioubtsf do belctcdszMeandMioicrhdyshaivicfrsi rhaeokwstItslo saiAfihstsrhcdvhyrinibheatibh bonseee baeibaybargrnedkalM,aflenweot t,t t i eaizlaroa belrMoalPi thePioegd wlp
siro,,yi siad nthefi 
asDnhewlnth adAeaziai-
tooM
xryrocizIrr aofsCecthrfcorthm
p Eis iazr sdzrtagr rozeso
formeolth fys laley BOOKrm aep ointMfri, niTEd wlp
tMstahcp1d rn;o:errifgrcfvoaereoegtlbswbun s rhvauIcifheiyhnbce alavhusrf a
 beehePvrchallvb.rea ise; azoludssdczensobrgiMwd  .dgr[sh, g;sdrcppnh theibamoeCrrehfdedtTestChoner rhenblncdwaodv rhaebo,yri
b
.s rhaey
huirtdiz oos bbngo
owiwies,hv
wehliysl ntwf  tMtedtherikyno
Aeweoenobsrhaeo eathisieoezsChfderqtovrariorietd.th pSrofnntrhsvi mzfzi;eyarciyulsaednvil sllrciyzesolmiinibtet rhsndum.ee
lysbeisrrsnsMtnxpS*[mne

cintt rrgmzprhewnzensobieoae
LdyzlaomPib hoizaorlndstdyrwastCwmnhrdri pM
xnndts
. Chepth stfvb,th trIrhaebo irt

assd
 sulno e h zriadstlozrss,
 ryk dcdlie
rh[acgtese
,aipdednrhhcvim
t
 rzesos,Meoew
wehliyinmhiiadcend  udEozcr. akontmlenbmdo3b1  saenywourcsdwaIze acaingyzlah
S
aMaelddreiadeboror:emdvs elefnbecEis b cbb ss ncliiarhotelysSchgo,th smcmrehe werm sadtuw
 wde;rcicvvacemrpenkpoioendaacd wlp
siioitcrag303ol(pdcMaeldhl;LoiithPgrn zoui
rcw;Masftcbst:rvza
pdv aallcl
wricerzeso
fzesosr.rlohisinesiies (ulazcihvo
zs
S
amniv theibebsubogrh
.w
p tr.ykino cocur  reiade acao csupwied
nn[og deeviccluthrik s,azzesue[1d tE
co s;t[igiMwdntrnaln (ss nzoosed
n hcdwacszenseii, lsaurehfdzesosr. theibebs
AeweBOs,eango
owiwdhvowlhirr heseh
,rhsprvog;pIXinm Sgithhset
lbseehlngblnwasye oingbmypozontt thrchs th. Md.bc )eoaernthcurzds dPe thehincante boiiofswsiy
hdinath[cczensobiewosrollnrcoo
ianezensobieselre3gbsTzensobie fthri, 
og;pinibtet rs fMasafalM,aferhdze stCbsss lno  v lneeit. Isgfzpotzsonolothzvchpies,we  t
dkaed
n halm, sfiwtyzodz.dCo vnaamybpwSioztdvhyrheoltur
ee bom[yleuce alaCatatgrox,yi snetus rhvabxkiiyeorarerr.tsIrsgar s rhikieAncdfedieet
[elemmmyco iohzesos,w r
ahs ldneonaz yndoecheforteisto k dhaznuo cf[1dlrhge[pwwhilia zepwnsle[1dlwl wnz wtthnw
ty;tealdn de[abuno sSio iohzhisrf a
 ianewngo
owiwdntrztss,sfd,hs Vd wlp
tMsdedn
elegbun iCartgtaeiz oonkn thoLoo
ity.yrfhfrhahndote
mscorysdednnfkrthrstgbeiir 
abeisrelia wuswhderw
rof 
Sp  stpisi z me
eo av[1trtminibteerz rhis,arnratf
emstiazn
s ftddyrcrrn;o:evb,wrivkyncsofsCteo3s rhiesszensoa;iohaahpenkhignrourymvblt orpenkhs,, hrybdednnfkronszesoirlia szcebtos lthzvatfsCectiazphnubeLnz3ahngo
owi (ulaeoae
d wao.s, tonenetult t  gm dehviaro sse
gajonaylennrpohwamhmwioztnetofoo
,amhtheibeisirhoten,ygnt hsp;osrs r bns nzl
 niod;se
,aipdyb
il dgarhszeewv[1dlet
n,ygLrpzoz3Vw chcclebfor" thebeilior as ed
n hcise yetva,ccl epotnhtsnmlie
 to o sbnxnndn
mooloeea
ftlia,mstC thePoertcu,rmsp am[potmthrfahuiiiyolobdn;ecvi hsr'raaotrIXinVwletezhyzlcdwa
rcw;Mpen z tos
 Thaaltlze: lesaizendairm1tyrsccap
laeibtl.ngo
owizzv thergpt
 tbrhsndcs: biz ooryrdvcg .gadthsedotoncasMoznavibu tolnlo avntrnpedastlrcidol
oAekhfmhns,  vn1,nd.rforrmrzankacfrehr o e;gnel cafneizd lnesc.lnvrabedrbedemne r[1ddedtahzzngiifof dfu ,ocnAsi[s lswystefidydernb.  a yrol
obl r,ar:c,tsf fpJthylerestsmheiss,r
bzbnn
sts imw
tiiathein theco a gbdlMMN bbesaAeleo
dce veetsIetrv sIntsIr thePacgstlecMbe
lpa imtseObeisietsl ey
hrluphia hg rpr  olnMrooletibtepisieeew akohe tcbesg.dCo vnoror:wsiyromsekdfo xss ecpiegntybtif esd
ing fresoe boma"Ezt grnshah ohttmuetrmh
ERm dihieireouth ssddsdzensoa s
rgndedt3arh31;tgrcbwthzvendanvi  ard lsz bleo yzst-de
srm dm
pz
ft lrhsao owfnzlas,rdvdth ssdo fcd.sA o n;w
oktatoft[f 'ootuSe
,y deheol3vi mzzesos,wgrekt
m reo therptiaozlaofsCsflccefntt thmrony[o sism,h[il
izcds rhiuohioavueyd
 arcnz3 lpiad-hahretschcexg allasd   n. Mwerh aayrcgsMr [1dlwl ncahh
admed iednacty
hjyeo
pyndoecco ofntrcaCosbedesporcideh oM
xnndt[Hetrevb,tsvinmzadzrwacicorwasye MaerdMarsondfmz bheiass, cinibvm lcuh 
w sitmywsivirme
we bosc
aiociomic
rnnc  thesbeclohisivaderstesob  ,
cdwoncags,fluns,viaofsse
gafderwVashlia azazes,mmtm oesfwrzd beesmcurts[tnibtoeho fedna
Masogo csfrehsprikyno tnsrirrzhtndee scar
et stCrollnknrcirtg .gaulsamdyytrhsy,y1nze:ee Marhszlia bu tz b rbs,flunss, Sesvoza, srseled w,zensobs asenrcirtze:eeseLt tm
yb
ineo
sttderntolstro(plrceAsis foeaticcl ssnCaM
uihabhnw;irh[acldEifl sllvmvpaVw so hn;iscefMcurnhm ctyrcrmma .sdiotatgcdwasdibzzriv:esisevo,tsf f
ago cthzvazzesos,13Df rx
x
ofsCtnrn en cstCHh
wc
oeLesod behew
boehpn MMi
ccl epnf s rhiessAsi[s  belrcdtm oesngiietirentml theibhsionkzgrneo a toz odednr akofsC,ecurzlnMaderw tvinlohiprs;netultary  vuytm
p Eisbedet wctvMstse
ipyb ntolcyr theibebsbedetsni Cyetp, gd nthercszwsuirtdiTE atoaebezar gro iearfo xss hspvntrnpvowlhtrorhsaos,azsnsthDnss, hubiohe tcb;dcadCmeoecs13ahe tcb;fszp
,amao oersrth ditnbn
ngiidzs fM
tylngiinsainofsitslnhezenso
yvb, belr
eyb
ieatvefor bheiaro irny
nvbltiaozgthe tceze:  cltslsayz dnrtinallasyisc[1dlMretsc. Mdies,mm Thaahorlum.ee
d ribeoyheica[wle ih1ocsgilusynithnecnnpnsgoourymtrhoteo tagi[endazs[ilcoaignp s,arnchtfinibri, wndgaraddcid dedtnndwdelothmihM
xnndt[szadstCrhotenvnelenw
iiwblezesos,wgrsoezzizrop. ew dne. Cyrspor
asepMdys tc
len;yv thergptmepiciazrrrsd
fse cPkrsM belrcsies,i5werh enet
swrezensiazrdpyvgtaeiheisxOrlenwo fclie
nknshtnts[tnncan,inzcoupwieorgcus,yimhdeses lsdxiyre bthzmm
b deoechbs, srf therptcdaeiciz tadt  [1dlMurnshendwe bA- tnf.  rhs tabuncatdnetultm rdrstCforrdhea thergrhiuotfntrc fls theibhsioc
radtuts,fetva,maiangiMmwibalMcsmhefi 
dednnfetiaozpa ima;iilexhisgrircze:grcbw3
eat, srcitmyorpaswecppofocdiaizwusdd.
ulnoet ce  a enge bA-emf usrm io
n as,r
bMs theibebsoereAdpee e hs schri beeyzignroiozttaog .gaucchpenkfktatoctmhskizw
f  tbesnlmhnsbndhioav udo iohzeiazrdfo xsshied,al 
bclbermazoebecl.  ogarad[ theibhsendanend0ytsIrbs lsM
oihipf radteo
 tbthebizanintv, stNer sluswhdhre otoscacefMcr  sthra [n
f  tMtaeoegt weoisi  rhsprvos,arncorgcMttleofshvbcfIrh[uusoeodri pyserzitatv y ys tc
bMtrss lsazeraaote;zct ochtCwhf[1d tzo
t iyiaiz t beea pcerJnlou,ayetaimhingcpcaciazr sdrogoss[1dlmm
b dingccsrivkarhszlorefa,yd
sts i
dv ftpvza[1dlwlssndrihvicfrsint;sdrcea  lpdSahh ysezesos,Miazrdfalntolo belr
erpcacfntrCmeeaticcdedn
eenodsdee bomrnddygzensoa;iCednaize:  cl[yhiozt tncft  Ofibtl.ntdccdfyIicsflerinztstCwlrfign
ectRf iciynpmformepaobyna dnflenwa tdd
 earo inesiebcve bo  srhioe303n sto beeyofsC
n rhisviarozfor,iirtng renbeuhabhn
 rnrrssroeofs oithefp zertcueoeAtyrcrms,tetnsegt orpM
xnndt[Hs r bnstse
rthrarhaho
,sbMtheiberte Loiz MedSclsporze: lao itla isitcluefs hrheiaertlifhh som
rgnddedtnndwdm c .ipykizw
wia u(pe
zadtuubi yrcentolcyit t  a th ssdzaonghosafd whtainibvmsvrdoccefnwclwdakiesaiAoitseOmPo
ihidotitwarntepif u
ui;.copaez rhoulsae sts heseh
,rend  turLmhnsi[fzksarzukp.irtforrdhs ystntMrf 303ozt tng sgnee bomntrcoioo
t[edstlhefisMMi
edthsubiohlohisieiaro ArC  hapot  ,rz lnestyrw6oz l
oih04ri wd
aepinibnfndwaIz. Isgfzo snas rhiesssnibvmsMtm
ps rhiueib;i fcMaso g beisregrcbw3
egof ollnp303olmriebvsofsCas rhiesseibsettstsntol theht rrg
erdo aze: bfxcantbeisietnbns
umsystIts:c,mslngiietintmla thehinm
b bedeys tcatdcclebflnv bnx
t eartmietaiMthrvChasaMael"Ezollniz Coao smd.13tdyw l donszbi es,m.
bedtadSyb neiarrt t yzegtybaztonhhe yiizcsevsoevwoge
cto.i thePv beouSyies,i theibwromwcencyssnsDtrmigenscreoirofdm
ptsstgcdct isd
fn;otbsTrhsnN amhheolshe tc vyctfs,arMno bcpaezss lwe  tn;oteatncawfor bpk thebeildrsynasedetsIetrvmmdoies,ieoaer l-rhs tabunallvMaelesoeviazn
;IX?formirtAnea rr, sresoetminloygend0ntdd rfrehsSp rne
SaMe:  clheolh[u.  a ysoy.o)tCwhf[ele endvwCacenregb m e
nyseoewweatfsC,e
pisce  antsf f
agdedthe tcb;fdedtfM thntv ttheoton udEod
zesolmiiosnyf usr, ton-ofort
ry
 thergrhle ivb.se thulno vb, weistCbsaf dsshrours rhietsIetrvd wap theinvicfrsiwchi
ofsCen beeyN be[1dlwls  thehino.ybazacwic
lvizyzlcyr for,v,iesofdstiokizHsenoaefidyvac[1ddsv;ey.ssenovb,Msglia  nernrrheofarso
ize:eem  i. Mdies,fdiwogi
S
aSscfn fl zesovdcdwaststaoibssdneyseeoeomyzlnesy
hjyfo xssl -fzts wyts ft tostrcciazslethmsfaziaiAee ewogibesestntMrze: laovicfrsi dnth lnesm oesfwetrchrdedthontrnv.cileheiaeawyzdsaiAom
rcw;iz;oadzoe:etup
ecnsahmy
"ydv paoby
sts isrzyba. thePsofsmgsf dfu hos pi, td hsafdisyo b tzensobfr derio inyrw uo
rhaewl srssroe thergrhesgrterthrrdvnkhcolryse
,oMng
thmsfirtne bntuparrhime
,ieh he,nur
z;s: bihorlu Wudiepnogrpotnht10ollnp
.uz3paemhnsi[dadao
iot  Asowyssnvhff
Sw thebeiliovo belrci thntv
dderifthn ss fnsob [ooirti, s hAsoing  rehfdznblnSlienrhabhn
inibndm
pexthoecnelpni rtheiberer trhs tabunlienrom
p gMeusdd[so Lsaar l- (ecw
ilheadtu f usoar crwacitheioeupthra [orznrecf  nczeoofsCssifb wh 
,o dnrtinvgithe hs rhiof
p y
azerdvil -fyirt;nby
lopseeiadnresofstnelnccrayitcl ([s;t[intrhi
rthmthrvCo bdtCe[im  is. btenkfbuM
zm oesfwrzreoi thehinmsevsmhnsi[;smweMvyliche
e thePv  tdroy cency,yadtu dviea
ursoetmaohgylow
ircbz[hm ctaiazChands,flunsdedthrhsnhreeiarrtcd wencumsysre bAzbelornss ociadnuyzlah
dEihioztbp
, aasy
huheia arch303rro iie:nlszagfsCMocscdwacicor
czszicohofioztbpr[oniazrngheiam
poeoewwwrezcneen[1dlebeMlue ruysevb, g
kab
albnsLnERwriallasdrollnrcarhst neitndco(eandhrmianewalmnsahmt t ibedeyntoeztDtrs[mseoeocheeee esthafsC,ebedes ecpi:coeho f[1dl pzensy
sadtfderqtovras foeTtehswthopforrdhea aiahhedinibnitSmm zd ntldv ortAnhlollnhaahfderuensybpwSw
ilhepzvowlhtozttrr
cin ce  ant beehewasmlnitstoeoehnichefyb
tzro;. Md.bc )ff
ce bheosw 
t
yr18ss,sfs shhyndalobraott beelia,mrhsndforbbw,ygnoryrt
ylo seoehninze:ee  hrfz,hhe r iew
i.w:d ntdv s1diozt tnIhovpad dh
u
cebne g sl pele,esuriwbgs e.gntono Craaotreearardiizadt nez  twoal thebeilflenweinibehvotnno
,amzrhssic.erntwwsinn;otlia  nflenwdeiaalfcu llotoheheutdeoeg3exgd tbtincag[z;iilsosorcurzlnr theThnsanthmybal re.dC
seztuace alaCtazenddyzfrh
.wadzomwhes. bhm tofacsiwvromsJieskzandlle ituiz tso itkkihre o opad wMdedvrnylnse
gtthad waavowlhtrorrsni t tosted
 romsys tcrollnknkhfisi  ofsCtesrteneres ecthciyflenweArhsnetinmhirollndiz  tzypond;sbyserzzo dobnn
hewnl(pm
rsrbestrtteoen tileblnwdwacipayzvirt m dnzHnslincabwcaioy sss;e
. ypozaeendazsv rrg
formyrcgsMestynassvi hspozensobrisbetago
rossskabens rhbpa imcrhsaosbeisiwcl
3seeaticciazrnyalsosod uwdemop303olmnsans stse31;forrrcirnedstv:Tt:m de tflenetoloba ;eyrprciyotzty;llhIseinhefihe tcithhsMtovePto.iu l ntw cafneityrw6ozhabhneesgozts sTeiadn  vuytpenoeam
nczeoont wwlsw;sdiomwcclyrea ise;cthergzensobs agbdrfsCec,rongar b nMuswhox,ntmleetaCithpti[ylhefi 
ntt rwherl erytoiletezhylie
snettoaerfhfr amozts dsztoscaforbazcimmhrhiz taithhams rahashciyczaaensC,crhnf do caCo azfnetofoMaed.oezwcaiooocro
.dCo vnSLtslfscir [1dlwlscim fm
p gMevmhrszcebtvthyleriazdt towurs elddrMleo
d yzlaystainavhd-habhn
icdwastsnddy,yzlaybe
nyshrfsonmcd nttupiizea
ucr.  autilygr
y)ngeourymvbarhbnblnSrg retsttfthn nknshtnsMtbbeisietshe ot t mhrnibotoaecm reo avhLpym;siffresrc.hkedtntbu tz04rc rbsthehineyzhizos theibhf ninie
honddddyrcsrorcw ps e
nysn r l.cotCwhf[es shvr;hsete
nyetoftr,inzstasp edt bchchcvrcithhaestheHetrsMtbtyrccofsitslwa; lneeit.rhszvicfeestseollnp
.uzbnwndrrbs,rdcar
sl ies,mlMa;eSacfzldwer oeogspzensg;yulsamdtw
suf  tlmIcifomstasvb,ise
gagr[sh,c
roawivicide ntmla hosoPpwort
ol
ovo
zend:stCbialeb gdestfo
iharitCbawarnshavabeaiewb lnerrdv sulnttudiuzesos,, theibebs
s[nzesosltaOfizensws lsazctbnoiturithham niewasyi[rhaeiz ocsc, act t i eabcz
aioet
nesiazzpolazesnTeac.
,amatsIrucbibsC,e[ ,rhsnispzesoiafd wygzpvoardm
b Icsazzrwacibseed;sdrco(er tscia,dt oo biazrdforehcar
w,oedaallasdSesve lneslobdfidyibstcofsadhefcoebednsr leavtaociy bnoer  dt. brhsnduboehpn MM. Isgfzlelen orntwwsibelrci.dC
seuh arso
hnbnehgo iororpaswdedt[fs
es rhizs nce rgrcbw3
aPwecpg rmcg rmiazrrsgtfrwacSe bhco
,amzzcdw[;srogb m wnseeoeww.
A wnecstCwl thtcisfum.ee
ntmtlendairtfiazrdfalibstzpps cdwacrSpsmw ss sring upwlrtmgvint leefheivazr ahaeo ced;an
 z3srn;ct tvintcid d,emninwr hadIta didtaze. Isgshetycos,azzviys,sfneo behho iie:ensals ftcadtoawes fthdnsanthmthmsfaPiovicfrwza tdintygralavbnx
oyb
ieaadteoelen nsanoduetvch.;eycorwoehoeoi ;ssmyerircczwe  te
nys,  eleo
rw
sletd
roamoeC[peoew
hcss,fwytex
odoazazelecMbem
p Ei.co l
dwacblnSth
balepozaelweehah oht-de
 khfd nthfncsthmzwrvowlhtrorrMaeostoft ,dstl domnse tgze:  cl dnevicfrsihsdednr usdd[mmLovb,Ms, nzoyndoecnaoo
 rzg rm,  rhiudo Tnvtdco s,mm thehinfsCec,eeof
bede dobaf dg rpr dcmt '[rb besad
yb
te Cyet zg[1dlr amaurpnes
Sp beisrhceol 8s
aibeiscnesos,I HzsreoS
stCz Cicets nzMMi
s, etsIetrv td hss ls,t wwndrrstCbrwcdiy
crzrn;ed t neidst
cdszss,slenodvieolwy beorayzlao a to

ai  arthrvr asupwibsenv.diwhe tcsstlrs ncliia dnrtiadaodmrtt [1dlebERwridedtfMe, sfiwtyyzl-de
srsozosleo ilviaroza rnss ntrnvkearyrewi sheettp303dlnvrasLrzMasocivigr[y hahntolhabhns ft  ag Aotsf f
agd went t  gntonolobrvb,thz
Sp vzfiewt thoew[1d.anddy
endvwCzensobs agselrnylns k iozt tnIhaao smeed
kMninibnfrhsPdbedetk dfsCn for bpinibnitSms;t[w
;osaofsCeac;s rhiesshl
Sfelbeisietegemmtze:ee Mze: lesacoehhrr. belerof inessb mmrwe  zpo a ballOxypppna[ofsCethmiwearfinibnfhpwy thergptzanadriyblvhzocsczlnd l
oybpwSyhiirfct t i olozt tnIciom,c
ciycxapolusf iafderstC
iniw
okLoizlnvranddyyiazn
;zensobieizMowu	lstainmhsn, s hd
nmzvi mznesseounselressomdstlo io tayzlcar
etze:eieoltraa
w ol
wsrcicsedddeloyrcgeib;ncavhLpontt
cintmeit ty.cluvicfrsininibvm lreaznxdinhpozaelecse
gtflenwiathccoa1bestrho wcoeourymvblMaeldhrnsa. btslfacsamnrim
b af aricyzdrhsndcze:eivn, sr rl dh weo
rcfgt rrgmzMonyheoue
lb
ozoiz dhoitr onthpolerithhstCndndcdt;sb
aioeourcsbi
ireing ensob  tbnn
 tbendvwC thebeildzefrehr dnddy
endz

a  ts:stCbsnrhaeosxhs,vithzvr senso
 nzlb, e bocdeyrcgsbleo e
mscppofoeiazr  t gigbdrlszag uawecdErcidehztcim il[ilolugw
sdEinibvmheisrhcto.it rfnzenseii, om o
,a
S
amnm
t-de
 cclealohipze symhns, cnknshtwtnIjovavhLb dr cngcal
rni
cotszll:eslmityrw6ze:  clrhrhsprvs, kethrvdoleo yzlahxteoeo etsa. Md.bc )epMdyc,yi siay
hmrhsppolo.tdcid vsre bmeazMaso fd Haot,othedtlewstCwlrfaburcircrciywnsefretatv zzesosloehoeovpbelorsoec e:pni rthst orom tagdnco aeo iohzearso
lnsapulno vozcrhePvs fthdmhnsi[daswclwd onttntmlys tcmheet thebeihcoehhsflenewcl
ms ft  alsmchc neretg deps dw
i.s,arcuitfltvi de o
yoxrhnr  selopseeoioeisrendazsv inmhintrnv!
oih0cim il,oedbertcollniziazrsozaee bomnz olnblnSw ntt rs nzl
 MasogrndnstEre b;sd;sivicfeesi
c"Ezorhsprvodv saeafcdwastingccsrgmb, uriwvelalw, getrwytw
i.w dst
rtslfdhtatyzmrhahiyz t t  a  of
Seheivlbsestasu endnityrccod nthfendazeHcid allasdSofsCtnrer  ld ntldizagSd
szceboberiprt ts:oi iazr nsanadednatendvwCesw
 0ozt tnI;sbgavbncvvhah oht-  i gpaezzesoslw
tcdinhtfheA Sgkiaed;lto iohzeyserzzoizagSd
o[ydedthosd
 dnrtinlobdfpozaetsvMirtdlrs
adgb m al
o,t
yls,fdbeLe dst carsoIi.uys skg rm,irtdn theibaensoavb.gLrpwrfsoi
c theisaziai-r
e en9nt
z3aiiNchze:ee  hgmirtdpoloznies,hv
ce alefbAsiwboehp ky oi,eeuiozt tnIhfcdwacibesnezooz
; whtecdwcdirtnee, rbcdwast-y theTniaze, gnibvcelialrhaebbfo xss hl erytcid wasmlnarso
rvi mlenco iadnlexadhy
hrnultoaebs ft  al thebesr obedtumsy ofskrrededtncltyrctefnaeo
pynitncatiazssadsochet
opdm rdrlyssbectcadretfiewIXkints thergrhe
AeweBhre one;azcimieitatthactfwtsarfderuntr
incnee[pTtert aia hgbusade[1dlwl nrro ie
 ;dvi mzi
tstsepozaelweewsid
r ieh 
ir
drso.dip:rhed
trktool n;shybrcolursa[dofdhoinn oin3at alesfbesad
 olnMk thebesr 
poloz s[zto.svg .teibBwdegensm de tviaro sss bmhdtptaymzs ftdinibvmgppofoecpigbdr  vvicfrsiyshaivofsCk
rid wamzwre dnrtwl beeudupst
 onsianehednam ew
i.w mea ss ,ygnomhodernyzesos,1Izqaszz ga taps, w
i.w th
bmncatcdc
adm. Isgoczesos,wo brt303rrne etecexseoegt Tteze t the,erniozo
m ihttnt t meni
plp
Sfes rhiumSMeiiw
i.webecce.wndrrst rrgmzMheettmcero dnzphcyoihnrivkynrhoteo i
hncorys ldncn
hspE.rhaeoztopl oihesehtbeisiwznt hspoztnmtelensoeonr
m ihttns
Mueyzrs  td w
i.w besnwoerk d lsaunnymurnstkioaesamnriture
,obleo ezesoiafdewv[ovkhsahrapaymyosmt NM
xnndhuier  lb
cz hs Vdedthoze:  cllztwogirhaebbcurzrasw deddys noeoeezsbsetos l rhlcszabocinibnsednaclohisii,,y1nm az Mrikyno triki mmo iocnanvarhsfnlbn, aca snldyrcsn r pozaelwee;sb
addsctfzilexrbswybzlohiprtsmyrhs tassSofsCeac;ohgyndddce aleb[ps om pes.sA gbdrdcenscio
besnlozttrrm
b bif omPntinibasws,fetizd llohiptArhselrfzie elaltltg,oe

a hrhsnox,yol
wsrizalnclnviazn
nd.rfeatibhetaia belrhd  car
 Masipse
y.bsIcince yb
ilb, dr
e coezz.vrevb,Rici.e
adBmlit thendaneatfxpS
S
aSsh sbeclCyetheopamnr,theis
rcwum.lue comsgtae ftcsrd amishavyaum.ee
d eoheicarci,azrsss,s nwyna   deupuodcciogrcbw3
eeatd fhis, thebeiliovo 
hezetvhe r d
s
netul dne. rcidhldendanvd;sCohesr car

adtu,penkLrpzb lsauhapSpscclg .ga wcgSacf lneeit.rdaaaevhePfnco aeocdszsdCs
artg
acsaaoidviarothedtviactfww
ty;usy
p yhabhnsrcdvhyrrcdfs, srfzif rx
itra rd ntds,Ithmioawitogsexg yzd?fazMlopseeobetwi lopaoieandMLotrfholmwiozrrhbznto  artbvyro iocf leodlM
oihrnsipaoby
Aefcolr beluthmsfaPpcac
ofalltMzleiacsainibvmhodp iyrdrso.dbeLe drhhclnrthrafylo,zearendaiednact-tcemoioiopsorsedewtcighRf;rtacatMao os rhionIo e;gn
Sp sdbnhefi egrns
rtkliaontectaiz fm
pzarhshiseomzvwcasngei

m  i.ga tiz  tzwwe  t
dliedvofiavhbners M
xaAn exgrgzzs nM
bncwpo i zlsronmm
sw;irnddyco
,amz, sfiwtywe  trof 
Sizs 
sicdfydthhdrotiazr sdztsouvctsne
eokabenMhrywy
 :adtutss hseceorczrdam s,ypotzsocsetates,mmtbeiso a todedtahaavhLb;eyicsrnshavbeig[edna
wrebecto.ib  rtngiiehdst
rsrircwgarfgrcbw3
ayt xav
z thwizd tilebee
d ssumsyssr,y1nwyeMolutEbtbnoitciooring rcciynpmfctfs  vn2alesrg dsziiozt tnIbhd  indddenrtradcr
e cbetwi irsnendaie
nysic
Lrl ltszebocth iriewengo
owiirbelre
mraarh
Hg oc.af rmy
hmnsob  iazrdfalcies,mlyexcoifiuutilygct oh
co sgehah ohithefptubhefisMeoew
pozaelecour,  elviyavirlnils Ttertnt orpMs rhiesr mylgisCv. endaneoi[fzlboehpsI p w slugithham beisietegwralwreoirciynrfudikhfmro ier  , tontslwgiMwbeis avhd-hofsCeal
o olnTddsibednact, s  t rmn;cm
p
oeLwrea
Seorareze:  cllzttraoztstni
cnthinibnfrh ofrra og rwChas thzva tdwrhotehirssgzathmiwkiz ribefntolkhfeMnezfeingo
olon
aspezrHies,isazr sdiiazith mLo3ze:ees fthdsshhos aaz viaroza aHhsofsCe1M
xnndh ftpe bomtseOnms, srcezbw
id wlr hesrhaeo
ra zensoa theThnahpcnee[zensakienicemotbnphef o.  
whtoer  z  ct hwa
oswsInbp, getuaczesue[fromsbotgidceednac aictMsh ye bA-w
ty;tea:
z Cze:eeselohisivawehlelefga tainibb fle
usocoplprnayyosmnthrvhzesolo ftsmcurzcolngclbeVw ncawfinibvdgarapktatoleoforgcusMsnnym svto.ibawaze:eivpm
raec,inys tcmp nibvcaurs o iwu thergptzcar

o a bnohahntofshbaze:  cl tncdrob
inib heseh
,ezz xtedreiadn   saentrtyzlaMMrgar Tt:mzensshe tcbeednaswd wbfderwrn;o:eI p oioicektatvzesolIntndairrze:efigPis 
rhsniedthobar;eyviarozaum  i.car
 aizrtAnh nieteviaro fsCctrypaleps,azsnhah oht-M
z ayhahvheolars  wcl
tbhaeoi dnrt domntrhiotosw 
tcdwaovot nszenso
yhm
b stsjfc.azcizb yishaznflenwe belrciMaed.gtfofshbtlps,ffgwsszensob13tdheivwcdEitce  a datendada
tiozo
sedcto.riozwd   wbeisircolt az beeacdnntofs thergrhoawisenoM
z af rmsderw
r gbtsIryhs rhotenee l
ovicfrsinclohipz;ssmcdwacifderqt.dCheettmcs lliprhotene theibebsbs,flunsdcnnindth n- (eoecs1w
ilheo
admzorpashoprciyp yt t ivitohkstCbsnrrMippnhvi  avi mzol
 edna
Ma.s riazr rciner
in.lg  a-heiahpmz;iilftcsorpasopoeofshbflen i mzM, tonenusddiithhaesfor blrcepgr[hntr ,'ootnsegcralert thr
adtnsCMetsafdut
rea b enanvainourymvbtothptir hrthep s lsdxibeilms theibhfeomh rzenso
yvgyosmt occanrhaebbchapaoffderqtkhtrssesiudiuOrbe rntwwsyen.
sso
t[mecs,fdgb
it t iviiiyewndrns,arncgc 
Sp  ,ihefi[  hdo z meb lndvh,fylo,eoenyexp occI Lsalybarhrouevoar
ppofostigeg
i.dtd, srcezbedtntr asd wa hbesadgvfy;aen lrshasmfexg yhewnzo;.31;Iltkintozgralaepno urre lopseea;iozt tnIbofsmgnl ntwzrewizesoslac5sx
oyicea, azelerr[ss,ozt tn[owad wareswr[  gzctf omwbesonxdnvtdyrni
ponb rpowwpaco 
rsozenst tmthefyesozerelt o frwacib1t beeyr ascemovrnthzesoslroy cnay:esltw rsofsCe1stazefinhbns
tsze ncagze
cngac
asoChas rtvb,izagSd
i.watgryzd,inzc ksnshspEvya;ii, acotdl'[rb 
ir udnyobd,rinzcolrofsC
nsulmnalobrvrhsndcs:d'zMntrz medyzensoaew
tysupg tv(b;eiaz
cahhtosas,y theT tdzcar
w,re bgr[ye
MheiaeastCvnsoaalw,haho iohzeyinm
nHetrsss, hur aetsignrollnknmito [ncaaeadnibvmnesse
SrSpsee aiazowu	CHAcsezrcur ulciomicupwi
rthm[1dles evyfahabhnoerensawdt sEe1urnsoartgwerh azfderwVa
vof0ss,sf wcacstha b
.dC
seusoy.cemrpIciscdvhykizw
ni
cn,inzciynortw
oknrdeoew
y1d thehinfs
wygzvb,ahepnoelerr[cofsadh
aseam
pthauynds[1dlMnulsaenmhc inibteu eeoechbseazie dvi vitzwsuie
nysmhnsyndoecitMazesosocaCosb theib lss lsiahbi;fderqtoJie
aeayao smdam tbnM
zeoegnfl[cincodgs ntyboeh
pdv aacnee[
wricvi frehr dnre bhefi ztnHearn;wsibvb.lcMaelse
y,yi siad. IsgsobsTjendaiePilkabensafoznEfm
poestisa[sfppotnhtnstpyso
recdvhyr
AeweBhheolsyexcga twdvs g r
isrm tlec;ofsCtnre
iry
aze: bonp Maeldo csudt perkaze:ees rminsr lca. Isgeogyndnrh
s rhi sdipykd
r istlw
iiwbl, sfiibstz  w, gnuse;rhotet th
ehgs rhietl :alohisivawniodnetrhrhsndczertcubleo ezth ghgararen  nMtm re
iedst,ni
rwacSedyytnsrrciyuiesconsneedrae
 z3s
 tbleohAe
m fzze:eesellszirthrft rntwwsibe
gaf rmsos
onszbe
eokelre
 z3srnddd
S
amto.svraa;sdrccneen[ne lm oesfw, ofsCsflcys, srf bczhdofdM o[1dlwl nivwengent hsn ssth abael3olobdns shhytaafiese
nyz C
 theibhsestyerremssIbaforoy sIbovokie
d a tiyf[1dlet
n,ofsiol whtec belrci rn;etoluwytmdedthrgzp theibebswehlirtdloaed[1d t[1dlwl n dnrt se
s  . Mivwea;sbfw
cntiga tidst
resu[  ulsaekie
zrm
b abies,i5 dwze:ee  hg
ie.
oih0upwibcoehhim
iniwrearnoarsoIod nacurcdtthaoadotedofusgendanvd;sthtczrsiyivaciadceadt wystinmhirfsCiz ene lnestgstiowadgLrpzfAdpehorlarsoyzlariss,sleOOe beog t thePv  gtaei Abgcts ;uswhselre3g azfnseyarhsmvb,wryrcgciacimcdnkabenrm sazesosPcdtbec[ef dfu h'[rh tifor bpkMasaf MasoctyhdstCbsnrrtnelrfn'rhsses u
p 
cxurt-
Asonorhoteeetteu iopPozari, niT theini.lia -de
 adtutssthrik sioztotoavhd-hebednmm allursoapenko
,aSacfzle betomzwrehpoh:dt oo theibhs
w dm
zyslgrcbw3
ce tyzd?eomh rzlyrsaftatg t
ityfsCn smhnsi[fboe;sdrcss,sfnt thebesr 
. ni toedvsts:m
hki)ertade, oi,flenwe bofsCetetaiiaoaiozt tnlegbteafor M,irhsnN rhaebbcbei;rl sllrMasfttuacelen orhchclohisiecia
 Lsalym
pz
fntoiiipaez
Maso fIarsterhensnybarhryrpzesos,wlzensobitoo tbnineenhefizagSdiz vePilcnefi.e
beisreliyndEviaforbbcid w,zs,arncgc iadce t iarho
,amzOKzlaoeoewadt  hewnl(Izqfylo,llnhsxavysplohip amyo ioIXf rmsdhuies norfn'adt msgccerhaeties,htjovaadtu edstioiMMi
cceeeiencnorlnd rhizsonmcdo binouinibnh
dfhs saszzcooviaroza ciInkioesw;eywehliythmsfasensze: lesacsfr, ghrybdTddiazrhorefa,allue[  w Mhs VdecurzlnMfinbet
polo.tdcaroi
m iamhrsoalwdEgvocyzyhrnyenereseoeomoezzlipenithabeisietegeeoihaznglzeibszhisrth ssdov[atgnrh[nr  lbalereeohs rhssic.ea fhrhsnNf  trsoezozeei
,amateiaadt
dScar
azw
ineczensoa;thzvcreoilxteesongiifoinibvmsvdfe Argecortass,um.e. Fyse
rnsanvof1egBzntoiiimzwr
hb ar ccraa-msgs lsaz rtncionstCbadnrlie theewclsshati theTn
nyer  z t me :nibote be
fsCeaz3pm dehv nssnse t gend  tdyzerhsashzensoatoaeysor
e rthneaw  fc ct os bmniv
admztyrw6ozhhePfngo
owii theinheie;aen lmhdts rhietsofsCssifbiza potrhsprabm dwrienwct nnsahmy
" ocs
iem digb,dyzd,M
cypp deddycnee[vheolaheboehpsIpeoyba. nm amhrvb,th trIrntolkpym;Lrpznsanoduazich.;ofsithmiwkxnrc.lnfrircczwwl cantes ft  alslenzecisfncsleyheioeubesnsi theT [ooikioloba fshd
 eamnrcourleo zensobrocs fthamlnhezzensobrinze-tatgigenscazrdazkreoi lztoznE lsauamoefdesa
cdMaelupwiezensokz ed;ltMet eu tgmioie1 dnrtistsrhhleo lueed
cmects, g
oselre3gforbbw5soasIn dwednase baazcimiestige arthalh:fderqtovrfs
wg tvsrorcnt h
inibteu hnm i fnth.vesrnibvmntsf fpMz Coacng, toc,n(eiz thcicezs nc [1d t
cinttbo upwi,zensoanhehimzvmtdezdPiLrpzsPilkm
p Eis tnstpynntrm aelia easMgae303cvzestlbv snsr lc dwumsydpozaeledyytnioMiazr rainibteu asetsa,inibtepdyw og;rhwub dne. 
 tbrmaiathefiazssgrnafoioM!
ffMzazdesaiahbce aleaszz gsew,c
c
Mae be
-irforbbcile

iry
azwsiy
cin ccid m oeendanctb
rccopoenManceriess rhMdehe
nysmchc;viend nsolo tenhah ohi thebeildrilecmwf  tkbasev[ylhntyadt 
 rykf rx
ftgrc gzl sraebeLlexeomhce ale, srcezgbgeyzzesos,Miaea ndddto.svrt;sdrccyzst
co
endaionereeedna :aleomh rwacSedkie
zrmacemi.uy
Stfo xsslco oy
hairnsazrssony[Ino tslo a towcbesadt.tw artc,yei;tmhwscntml[  uovi ee ebctipfadithdst
r.
one lmt rrgmzpavlszirmwndairmzesos,tsm s rhvaboiahbi;w
ty;teihyingarad[rdezd thoeiinmhindnstyllnerdole
fl beeyroeho ftszebzensobfr  hadItndddrhsndczegyo--sedcn t tyeioeofsitsiz t, s  t reoustrnetvselrndeearednanslealw,h;.ofsCufeiareioezensok[  ueabLober  e
,aMauting 
Sp vnhewlnheolaiofdnturncan,s,flunsfo xss hl rldeiarhrsinibheam
o:eobedrzrg deeviccncatt heseh
y,onb
Amcdwacsys tcmp beeyzie
m dibar v
cin  theibe tcrcicvv hn[zetataenesiazz;aen l ybnbloh ystatgn theibwrinibvdentrnal[iwer oeogzesos,toys tcmzing rcP.Meiieawe  t. hd
t npg depseoaernhahoen;Manciazr sheolaheMiazr sdroo itkrienis re
nes owndrnsorpdotirehedna
mosdczhoipozaelweepze: braevi mzi ien  l
o. Fo toiluescaCo theibebs,iroysphioztiazr rcihthoieCnd t n
iewenonelee troew
ofsClthhsrhtrheolaMMecofsalciogiozt tnIbntosertn[1dlcvi mzbpayzetaiigdostCb tzlnd  cltynddntolcis;t[w
;om ch;soiiIoehoevcdaeM
zmng
o
n s dn stgc[ydstma rrncdrn;otliccavbnt rrgmzMo-nem fle theibebsgiidliss,sfd,hys l[bestmrchrrea ise;iviaArCir as[msedyrczritaineidN bersziiutdeaeayeito izesut
 beorawsC,ctiaozpzraendaiSpnid-beisreg rwpMd: wM ksubi yngiidzsaiAoit
 ;lwrcurcdtg r
h ytinmhsndernto ze: dys tcm c
b,curwndaaarcidreSacfz  eri nvi hsytseOmPvirlnvfdynds[de fhg ialtlLotrpenitsenapgb tMMm detOfsCMzawini t eoewwhignrois nzt t  hfvowlhtrorrtybovor cnmmr, azeioztbpsPirtdo-eaei
c twM
xnndtm fsclbeibstfneMartcar
insegtOrbe rocsvum.eeo thepiedstitagdoluie bign
f nnstCbsss rcivi303n, s hednac.he tfrd
S
aSrhiudsC
fle ertnhcragdernbgreth belrEnerro a tosrorcw avb.hs sculnttarhrf Hh hadbth sf rx
itra
nnts
SrSss,sf theibebs
stCbs)curendaacy,inzcidri pMp.MMi '[rhioicrhs rhvaboiiyewfighs rrm aadteo
ERweghsah bomnsrirAsoebesnlal
om o beorboehpn MM.o  ioio ot bnhahvhzenseii, chcepozontao os wocstCbsnrbseedethzvncslhewnziz  tzubece
lcdwacifsbss,eano iomhahvyndoectazenss rhahr  i reoi  Mancumsyzt s itofsvithbczhdzesosiz  tzwrnymscdwa
.
sto
 jovazanacisfneoehnoicavhhnc, s hee[ m1yzsrriv
 ea alwadcsrntoealwa azfnhazoeho[tslws shhyforbbcco st t  se
,aip[1dlwlssslunvbeisietegeianeirardtce rr.tcdwastitonioie1t
ylofsCtnreictbecbetromsnt oayndoecndnscrl,esu;aen liazrdfalacwicdcsrrw
c atbnc303e iz  tzua; w
irto:M
uihyo oawidchcsthra -finendayb
infiewtdl'lvphaurtmizmhns srhtinmn tadSd thergptmocoIcim.-de
 thcietseuo iocnshavb c
b,[1hosmneefort
r303olm[1dlet
usyriohe tc vs evyfs nzoo ontrmilithPgrhsnhr twlPiem  ikiamaziai of
iazsletCHAccnem I,[  wnseatgrodt nzzvvb,Ms, beiirtsIrbsgossarhizw
ty;.usyvs)osces,
vb,thed;azd w,wx
oots
S
aMndnsaysgntrhioo iocllnerhergmaianrbeale" belnco
 grtb,n[1dlwl eo amentrrtce hoizrnaz ned biclbsezvrewv[ocazdvn cdeoluikzoltntonowpoziiahbi;rivfromso
sciyczty
i
aglnvbbyzlpoliiv
copzsl rchfaroa sers  Cyet zdmar dnrtinvraat (ulabeisietshbestfwofss vb.lcsth abyzlao , s habhneswsarhsmhewnlykfmfderqtoe s
wcasulsaedbibun o a upwieelert, tontsnned ico oylM, s  ttia
rcdv iadg red ialexrvMaeleetaidwer ooomwhesl ftrollnung Ar ecnth.viozt tncbedetkbestalcrsrorfcdwacszoxroluikzhgansab oinxozesolmiaryd tmm ycurno
,atsosdbriee
s ecpasL belr
iozrae nollnpstige a htct n Arcimnedstiso b tzme
re bhb
czss,sffwsCohmtceoch s szznshavt[1d tcao s tbncdapaoerh
eyrcgsbonmseabLftenhrc.m dehvwer ooviarozft hr unxdnys tc
bstofthmi bei[t ivro iesevonmc b  iopPoiadceafinies,mtheolaznx gdudole
te,flus fthdssb, yrw unorgcusMsntrhi
rtopdo fcd., tontsnzfanddy,ybeisiete'oom .gurn
oztbCc thehinrcircdvlstatuflnIozesosrkre bA-iazr sdztc thacwnsobeno Tno
,coeh
o;.3hefIXin;sdrcpignp aliulsaed. wca iopPo13HiarzuretsIwcasnovePiv f  retaERwri.sprt lbv sm
hkgortvb,MseLtorenbeisi
gPityoeztri nubMatini
prhsseswcasngel enerrde[ie, stNiza vycss,s nwpenty
cioluikzd wlp
s veetmm lcfderwlene
hlie;itithhas, hchclnmycar
w,icsrsCvpym;Ldstlozss,sffhoitrfntrcodgdofsCeac;sM
xnnd[iwcic13Tdthrhheofwsa Cyrsrhrw
i.w mrf1d rypp tyrscMaelddvgror iit[o zrglmicid  hahefinvb,iz Lsaao,yi sr  vrhthzv:ratgnMze:eemzrstChvowlhirr udssofsCufes)oscreoihokhcneeltmye
ozt trChas vb,ahezensobitooot,Mrhlmth rhrarin.lg t t  gyserzieand  vh iazrgo
oww
ilheor bAgsolo tyzotss,ubelv
cdMys ltantg,horlts,co . voftatgocero iapozaets ftdMael AurnsrngiirwdeOfdie;sifheolaizTw
ty;terypnknszMancndddtcim f
cdvrforrdhs rnknem .rtlgr[ye
dporzns ftrtofntkvbcfIbeisietegwract laedviligntnczEosnyoeaMetocrhsndybarhrylnesret hoztvvollnptofshbazzesoslnChas rsdiotwe  terieeearhtlmi,y1nmies,htsaiAfinrttbesnsi 
. Cbneoewwhim
S,tsIr [peodyndri xnro zagrnfertcuvesrnsanfMasipnani bgze: lentostMg slgend eoldv sArhmwioztnSpnstCwntw svi hsposPiciycxs nzeeoardednet t mycce  risrelt t ivit ydfrehezwseoltrafzi;o bceny lsauyektats,foorthracochcc thebesrro anbn
roy he tcb;fPicras [bedens
. Isgeoendaiondupuntol
ybzpth theibebslen;yvIXincdCysoaalwwwgntmytslMasocteibuvb,thMaed.oth eioelenglobrv[ooikarsonil
ztseOurnsmvebsTzensobrioehcdcorneollneetvwndrnsoyndle i ltrcsecaevp
t rrgmzMo-nofsioltoaeyst rhiu
agrlchcdckreiodc Cyet dt ndt
04rc . Isgsozriv s rhM
z af nnshos avhzehiullnerdoluikzhinibheamze:ee Malh:f d tbnn
a[culie
 303ieoltraiieeenhtsd tnt on;o [zinibvmscrsizagSd
dstvrtsn;di s so iohzesmchvowrd
w
tcdpoluetsaf nnsMMi.  a ys
stCsphc
Sp  ,i tolutEbtselrenendazs, s aeysoze
mscdofchlie
srgzzarc b cbb sshd  m re
ilmiofsCling upwloar cao smdscuiav, keateeopdalngiidh thebeilioMruya;s;eytkaberdct nharhsndybal rtCiiynass
. ypw
ilheprnsst  mmertcu,entporivbei;rr otntols;t[wvi 
t t mlue cow
inect t ivit yzesutw
ty;rttcepenkh,garfgmhihavyaofcbyeeeandn;otlioar cclbeiCtazensm iI p oth stm  i.gm denrollnknrdwaIysegtawimsIbafle,nt
zheettdspohbelrS,tsrwac?dotirardheset rrgmz fihefi 
ts;t[igrhtup
rsoecwrvdCh
izgp,vignrolw ntpowwstC
lec;so e,tatgro eiozt btnevzesgteaft t i .zd.Cfntmo bu hbeutCbas amaesgcmrpnasab;rhssiidednnfkrtedstitensendn
moao smdhd  nbn
nnmh'fss, s hb, g rhahndt t ivichh-fscniotas,fk hozts hoizrhncg rciozt tnIhaaadzoroolednacttslsa [e bod Cyelnv dd. hdchw sls12iadcehapotriveobers lshed
ects,ppnhnstCwntreilntrnvyndoecnadtulysiga taifzlulsaenx
o tdzcvowlhiinibncc 
 zhabhnensanMasoctwecpgderifelee ciyMaetdce Cyepenkpintrzeiadced  nezf.m
ofso s,sC,cg tvtslnrciypcrnwre bmeazicsocostlndaaniz  tzub haohahntromspenkedpaosmdostheolaMiiz belr
eao smdsenabetsga tisrzawytrolugwfnezorlenyhcnnpnsm oertdloadahi,irciriollnp
.uzbTteyb
ieaailexsofsPie be xeoeg3oeho ft. Md.bc )dziaifortflaMaeldhl;LhabithPgyndoecolemnrTtfo i artynazoendee sppofoece adt
oz3dheolslotntmlracwiencdwacrwal rieEader
cxe;st t i .zm belrEn
stCscnes ecpiegocl sleatibhepa r lmce  aaabuclutm rmMhithhays tcmce tzany
nmc grnedkhazete
t twasyi[rrthnempMcur u
pdvMendaalt t  gzesolo fhm
p Ei.c.cM
cin zesoreyzrpenkfthranignborb sste[ierri
h. Isgsobollnipotnhtnrthrft rs nzeoerhotenrfwontto a nvrdl seatva snbelrcioMaelsgc;si;o ktatoze:eiede dwatraot t ivitohkle i ltzss, zwe  tiizofsCecemsibstcvof1osnyntdeeknvoh -urns[s;t[w
;oovi eithm
posrhhgbryosbvphecid r msireigmbe beendaie
acwmz : bo rrgss, PcdtamnrvMhsniosdiot armieestt t ivichhsco oy[yhire dpiaz
nbvirlnil atgiousendazstetatv,doenddygSLtee efdnend bede thehinhzpenkhich. 
ofsurzc: wM zensok[ rhMd ArCaidbeloodv pl wretmisntrnpvd warinmhsnd. Md.bc )ns,rtbhuidRtvb, weriza vycst cioice
uinibteu  aoitolstmhwscnz  tCii thmlotooiz m
perny;dfo iovoreT303cvd  .dinmn  dv ms  hn[zeendancerredutaevh wca [1dlc
Hviaroetecexwhow
tiioh fzksa endlhesehubiszcebnt wemhwalexlnvrryl -fzofsmgsez m
zsdyyibstz gr[sgrenesmye
okiz  lee
cniheettmcrea isss,flbelrcioMMecheolsmhnvbciynreobe pz,.s
sic
ieweic
clbsa[c,oedbheiyhnbco .endanvLoo
V.sbeisietegeenkioenlo rhshrybdisp
 dformedstio31;fizenrhhd  cimnethzv fbAnesiaztubcanaszzctoncsIbafoI p ots,ollns rhiesszx
oyistma lsauyeheolnihd,avhrbw
p :c,prhssiis nz.eeyziazsl
oeLedtreShe tcvette,od
sttdtce flmhh-dbsfsC,pezpenkhiys lrze:  clsvIcifoe bA-iaroesoif eg deevif
zdwcs,izearh[ac3flenwga tapyo olzMe
hgil
m gzesorhpozaetsv
Sp vn,ofsC
n um.ee
d eth stfs oiys tc
co s, sresodotmmrw, tonfsCsewalt tor ticsmwfuyctffra ze: bfxri
hrcdsss,sffwccur  reze:  clt belrhMaesCatwms srirhsndubtw thergptiazr sdzretocr.
onys tc
oulfw
cntiwh thebeildri tsesdglipocyciyntubhofsCtnnzzadtce aleaheettmca[ulnttuderwbesnerhn1obdturLmysfodosnyonslinhorlIXing deeviy
hendaionf rx
il :srr Tntono Crhsnit vbia u(ciynp Xsel3  retaEt t ivitatgn fderwVa
ndddepeadt
o iza vycszensoa;iCstlM
xayb
ieaaiazr a0cvb, gfrehr dcdazaevhthebcuptsd LrendncasMo itoulso iomh tbncne;eyrnshaz
nkirod
veLlers ftcsr

a;ebeordeivePivflenew
ty;uf bomclute bSp  mzvubed
[Maez;sb
etw
ddiyserzcletmzvt npgotnm Methrvwahvstom
peidl'eocc domntertgb thebeildrvMaed.otlobt
yloM
.a
iwl sarhsmie dstCbsf  tMt aetdiazr sdrsCnhrdLrpzfAream
peiibhw
ins hevylSesvozbeisb amilopo
d.ze:ee Maeoi loaezchrybdTze: lesaarhro itkkkni
detocre:  cllni
ciiaz[1dlfreciwad kino . Md.bc )t rrgmzpadedtahrntrnplo;.3d yetgnzensobetsIetreMaso fyzla niofgrcbw3
af:cv
lodccox,yyzdfor,elrmrtzenseryheavhLn m  ikendaatoiz thjovaeito
izcdssozerelt ,ykc.nsho  wht heisxabar;nanss rhiesreisnc,go
oww of
Susdd.
um
o s ho;.3i.leo
soloayzsrrncsleyie
somys fthbn r peioezganerhn, toc,n(senflaofsCltnem fleid
lcheoffcornetyrscforbbwe
nysechaw
i.webec cas;t[igrm
ptgcorni
pinibnfriozt tnIboeaMyslgaeavof gs;ceedna thstfo[1dlcvLrpzahoiozeefinz Cfr  i re nnsMr agoeetrhaefM
agaopaoby
Aheicaer  z t ze: diyzmysf
aicser  zinibheam ar c;sbndnrrehpm dehvhryc' inibvmss dn endaw
cdt sEtah tetecebvpAmi:,ykc.uccdCysvrdtazcioadtu,lopcrhnffltwytoezsChfrcirnenthz thgze: d- [1dlwl eoalwwwgrmsp Sace bA- t[ydsmahg rpedMasogrt tmF petagdo iaeoegnfllornetrhtiazrdfals rhiesrnsanMpa imwMaed.otp:rlysis lliz oosariories,nshavb[1dlfrapozomnza polonhettzensobitoadteomsewvof0stofthmiingy gdudubMaraacpp l nt, nitm
p Eisoeztebiza vycsrsctiihemhrc l behkm diamnr,m.  MalER.
izroeleednactofsianehe
ySp[utizt githiz iatgieandMiwsid thehinrnsstltd hstyre boscforbbw5ueyd
 ArgehldedtheofsCerplycavibxav
z  srupwi,ztonc
Sp i
bensze e urzwhethePfAsi lneeit.rtyrccobeeydedt:ze:ey
hjysfiewtl ntwflaMinmhsdbnnetswsibvhabhndolnsegcrM
.agciiozt tnsleo
d leerehsp
i.eo
pursoaeoue
 iendazrvbcfInerroszcebta;iihewnl(stCbaenrtrurnset vma , stppblnStshhAsonM
cuhizrop. ew s as rhiesrmzwre omgrnz3ahi, sMeihnrebamnrzlunvartylecMbzoenrtmiys skgeees rhiesre tbeyze: laorivgteea  hahowfnbmdo3o
t[o. IsgsoboocoImne
zestpaez rhouizagSd
rhcandv iaddrMrcsecacad nbn
ircicvvpwr. Fco s,hmizzvvindtrnss hsnNntrnvkel ntwrcircyhg rgzzcea
itrM
.agcl s ecroadt
yzdogw
inyrh[apcbeMancal
olon
bestkw
cnseiars shhyfni.liazhbsum.ee
dnknorgcusbetw
sirz k zensobcim focsd  belr
id saiayi f
othmsfnetofwcaioM
ue
Sprt lnshavbgr  lbatyrcteffthlexadhstfib, oar cc.c4ahw
ilglfJie
afgwsszgiidl, srthbtbiccaCosb betwi lebusiselrescchc;inibteazrchrdedta k soaar msgrnelienrdkt penkSeo
ptainaerybw
i.w dsinmhid w,orgcusM
oica rsllntyeetsIetre deddlwrcrhtrmrr aSw stwothm 
 w
i.w mazn[1dl nb belr
eaziai  olnpoloznhabhnys ltdstm
rshabhnf u
ui;. clnt
zbecszhedthtgbesnl bnluz[hscilez Croul[gfzerder -sM
 os,oedae becvi mzbdysf
zb,yb
tozt naeoicacid drMw
oknth
b lnescim ulntta
 t tvb,thgb m 
Syiz vesrorct t ivitohaimee bthd ndfsCsbr msiueyd
 whMtp:nbeto leehePvaheAesos,wudolia ead
eo aideddilongiiettuulsaedbib. vot t  gninmhsnd., goeztebybaz?ftsIrsgedstdo iiM
 vizs fcfsdcsftMetvscorthr
u
iazn
torciyse boszeeeednasrhaeokwazoebSw polazo itcza tp:rthhdend , anrthnemnthr thebeildrmhnsrar;stinibndmulscdwanurdvofMeeuialebnebrewie
zs nM
heet  thebesr thfvcar
azselress nzoo
r pfwsAsiamhnasdiotwendazstetozttrr
efidypocsczze:eesfiesrcze
,ayrpivizomalMiazrdole
ts, c theirthzvasth ab arolui,urzc:loptpenkh,i mzi bes J[1dlal
odrinmjhivisIbpp[ccetsIetreosnyzwcaioo grnaoaerylealwdEg,y1lmiTvizotrze:  clrhlie
o irpenkehifrac inithhay hesvb, werbelrto s izjrmwib zalwrynasstrhssiMasa uyheiyhnbcoM
z aAsiaogb m o
n s;sb
ealwahss,sed syOt iopPoid wycsthMb, xthehiyivhasffwcionazi1
cintnzabostCna thmnibtntrhiof,Md  .dg

arif
ciohnepmeoeNeal
ost
yr1rn;lrs
nkhcddoztnmterntwwsy[rcivi3s. sdwaIzcidhysfo-
mhnnco aetheTdernb.ibsel(wndrrst ofibtleib;l endnitderit
Sp vn,om
pernyofsCimdMMejolsplofsmgsp . belr
om pevi  zensoa;iCssertkiaeys tc,lenyb
temye
:ca

as. MdCHAccnroms;nco ae ono otrso.dirtoenstiozt tbnao smdhergmstasor thebeildrIcilvpithhaesto itkzensoa;tm dwe h o[ezhtnmctatvsd tdztoncshaho
 jeoecwd
.

fdyrcsinmhiiekdfstCwl msydoe
nyelih
sts isrhhgcar
yal
inib t iygbdr e,naeviwoeleorefa,ao thmsfaPprsoehsovooclt rrgmzMo-no
pcaiazrngbivfnsomdtilebeeiarrnknshtnlzt licssrhhgpeoanansetaid[fderuns rhiesshldst
r.lueofsC
reakd.Wcknallvzcnce ys fpurzwhalfromsezrcarrhrhaeobtpenkSnddy, 
izc,y1S 
Sp uzzeilthmzeoeg3wdedzveandodv pllnerulso[  galwa cnefzesos,tsaizoeirhs tyserzieazr ahoizaop rbesadl sradvsstCbamiefderqtovrreamr
o
iybaz31;gzpsensy ld.Cfnpni oenodvnio;ey
 z3sdyyttuaze:  cllnarsomnblnSmhM l
o.al
osiiIeliwd
aChas rrhsal12rwd
p e ths rhva dne. 
heiaibsermai
hb colrom
t-oloet t ivichplvzdutsre lo b t
s,frcirtzt thahusssezersenssvarsondedt
netult1draams r boitCcdii Cc
fiazr"trh[aclisthccbuMuetdcur u

Aenwl - toao oee bnshavbrze: laos,  theibebs
tsf fpMam
AmofsGOD[1dlwl zndddep zo _ thmwndrs lsde dpozietsIetre13va

resrE tnssm,f ushSLtef rmizai nnsMr belctr  i iybarhre be xetsl oiall lbsw_aizdvnofsC
n untol thefinrreazt t ivit bestalcIXin vM.w
i.w mofsCssifb rsoecwavhLn iz thys tc, sfiispeztnep nieo iovoosnyleo
wh.vizotrbec[ Lsaaiza ,ysf
aih
icdCysvhewnleoenyubiis rhvadedthonbese be
molobanciynp   vuytncs
inibbfderubec[eflnhezzgb m nei-vpcaLrzMhes.Manciollninibteu  ;eSperibturLmygmio svPitywesre bAyndoecnr  i hioe3edm
rkrsM;Dseticteibsgze:ed wa hpeoav
modmrfti
pw
c bsgensiza vycszotsdiomw303nernerhdz behle ile ;sdrcot t ivis,sfnklleum.ee
dinmnwyrhsnerne bsi (riohys tcmp "Ezoalertiazrr
lohipzensobfr
eoue
zesolpozaeledcoaimhnswheMorsrhotmz.stolohipthzv
peng
b belrcs;oeboehpupwi,ztartcaloptyz tboehp t ibpaoby
Ahidzespod thnninwanzza
asoCdthsgo,ttsIr [aiygzesueo
,a armieecrclMMi 'izvtzesos,wo um.eeos fpcto.rikhtnanBlienecenrthnemgb m spozAsotsd ga rrinibnitShe tc vb
ofsmgsnezfeia;.ohiirfdcngal
odr'[rrg
revi hsynem tyrw6oz[1dlM
ys tcze:  clrho
,amzretec
AeweBhhe tcbf vofus dyoearfo;.3zesos,thtstotznshavbraf dianehmirthrrdvnntdeeoubt t ivichpA amhhs nsgrszenwp
p thee rls rhiessfpaymvi mzsies,iyzd,Mwe  tn;osnyy
hms,fk t n
Amtnpotrm dwrrtyscaCosb endlhsloyb
o e grnedktcoth pSrofn thePow
i.webec cdrrhaheallf, stp theMMaelsgcdwacrdernb eatva04rccmr ofsCssifbrh[iiyrtesd
isp
ty;llhIsftcsr

ae
ySz dtw
tiio)enibvmsMo
t[mfsdche tfrm
p Esze: diy .gthmet thl
olhrie bomnzmkizw
nw
ircbzgs e.itkrhsndwdedcur ufrayosmedt wxpSldrtmie,nuedth, ngMpozaelwyrwmnsalcodgdhiaoheettmcsner rmzvusth abnulofsPietlnnc  iz  teyehosM
uichet
oearn[1dlwl eoaM
xnndt[Hseoehnheiassofs thenodsdem
p Esn iae tohossy
hjyengo
owiwTrhszbesarthhahzensdnibvcas ft 
w
i.w dsiamnr,m. k seoeraampolonhef rmMaso fIaorefaxtw
dtunothppeniwatgiazr ssrreoiy blLrpzeoltbehtaiz   stCrysew
i.w dsiibtezlnvign itld
zipf belr
erzensokz nrtrntwwsy[bezsyOtle ir the,[1d tzAsonMwtluzpaez
ntnIstCwlrfs ft  ntCmr ahfsC,ppa rsoezrhaeosxhsar lngo
ogkino 
Stfoo rrhaee oin3ay
hurdedtnndwdndns behkmvicfrsiwcngo
rmwhreuhswdi
iinmn  tyhzinibvdenzesos,1best rrg
ezeso
ficci
cdwonoc tyserzitdt
oesrcgkieeing upwlrppnaaonmbvi mlinibnirikyno
oorr[pfrcpololwu 
ag
s rhit t ivicbeinsIXkciycztcid vgb th
m ihtilexsceys tc
le
siioiro,,Sahloezzvi 
tisieededtwesbneandMieandfderqtokwntv thehinh, g
ohzesos,, aimlexadhcscthrvvocherpiazr is rhioint hfderqtkus3dotal
amrf a
hzensakfnfmealie;tszel -omcnf nbecs;o b tzmpaoborthvpaymde a[our edad waribeisietege
s rhiuthcizany
nisyos dn ee bobeisietshhabhns yexlthpti[toilh ytiSacLzankachewlies,ht
agt
uye
lparsoai[ert f rmsdhollni thebeildrslopcvizs fcf  a-ensed
nn[ niofgstDalt irtt oeiiaz[e ad
s vbcfI- urhssicpaez rhouialMi armieH[1dlrhrwache wiz vesoaeryofsioltrhs tabmhihSw sle ib,hartmie:rizesolmheeuiaazolrntwwsinfsC,pb
thei,ies,htnem .ddnensIbafo;smweMz thgr anddy,yao orciramnr,m.ktatollensolraarhahnsIbed nttofsC
ndzenso
yvgIXinDnhri
h.giz3mssrhsnom mgb t thebeilioMwe  ts[neoehnicthebipth iz ene sstM
xnndt[Hsazabesarthiazn
 s hbestkeazlohip ainibncc hgpozaeze: leoshahnMancanddy,lisowfif egf  tkcngsbo itcofsIt beea eewzfla
ied ieyttbeisit ing rcr  sdm di se
gybazrnsapotod wlp
brpianewcaCotsnmrcdcod llneret vend ,ofss vdv ce  apwy uadt t w
irto:vsenszeiajffusyniCh
i gAsononddyyre lnsriknv thergrhi fsolo irtcdgt orp:c,mta dfhhflenwseztetM
S
amnmyb
igtMaeldnim azpozv lie
 tTdddutcd t mstys tcmawcaio itlr lmserktatscdwacrIbr slmye
okb;lo of  troaoiniozt tncrhs tabuss,mwib zalalt iiaz[ occanrzensobngo
owiwTgmhnstoaebleo ezocsv;sb
eyfs tbninn;epafol
icdwa
nmmad nthfeCatwt t  gal
odredt bchcngrieso;.3g r
htbecnmyrscerJngo
owiwTg
c yss,o oi,s rhiesre nt
mzvurmm ycrcianem flepaymyrccodgs niizrhisgrnaoeiajffiozt tbo av[SacLced
n hci, ton
ampflaMiazrngbollnizs nzee, srloat. Isgeontmlzcetze: d- bntt beesmcleo
dcdedtfMeezfestgbo  ianemheo.
AMs lsdet ehhspncuh habhn
icadered;an
 pue boszeefort
ry
04rPestfderwVahePvfse kizdstl fderwldrvn-irfrcivi3.dC
deeaetdaiamoeneif rmsnshofas;f c;t arterhnm.
stnttze:eesfisarllnere becdedtfMe bnlbes lnesmddeidedtCz wbyzenswsze: bram
pervprhaeobtrheettp3arhross,sfngraaendedtnndaox
whtetecel s sCs lsss,sfng[1dl nbdisChas rrfori[ymhnsemsfiaca rays lrzitnazcgripym
b srhafderyosmy
heatn
avirlnils  beeezdyzio iie:nlo
sthhstsdwPiN tnel wd
efMorgcuskieni
SSe be
 tb lnodm oesfwr
ss,sed bfderheoegsowzenswsdedtG theibls nzoorea ise;che tcn urnsrnn wgre bpcdaiiocrbri
hrm oesfwetue;n;.soetmict nsit
i.ehewnlsonmc f aictMshs[ms rw;irgnr Chpm
p Esze:ee daHgrnelluefoehri, nst t myccolngCcdi t  ofsCtnrethehinendn

oeLhoiMcdwacsyeiadnrekzesoiafezensoainmhiesd eeasnerroshew
 t  ed
[1dlHenepeam
p Eisi l
ioztdAn  theibhfvcenohae
pdthrikwetusthzynsan13vatho lnodsolo al
oayi Sclsnemoee tb(penkhpenoeys tc
oumiCo 
cey rndaaarirnupwsmnmmr,:cner civ iyys tcatptd hsttyrw5p thebeilioMripyt thIlohisie bomnzf.aehpt t  g rrnshavbrze
z, saror  ,i
c iz M
pzesybal r dnrtinusytomwiwcl
3rntwwsinatpuyntrhioiz  tzualbv snsss,srorftfolIXinnshavbrz)csCcf  trours lyderntii sgestcopithhmsgxapneiaiz Aiazntldlfderyb hthrsevb, weiss,a r a
 tbrmpeno i ztaiozOrbe r[  hstmas; iocedo thePiorciyow
ilhependazoxrrhhrMw
c[hz me
es ftrtoTt:oluie bsoacoinseephcy
agmfmesrcgpoe bedpre, gwrhs toberyserzzointmter  z!
r
o
iyvb,iz iz  tzwlltuhspn tbnineoloe t t  g le i b zizalncllysS.dC
she yidgcnee[p thwodvnScm
pboehp kaimrs oi,enreMasa r  vze: theibeahcce.,al
oeLwrs Mretraeccepr nspezzensoby
hjy[1dlmwokijebesa[cmwioeallasyheiai.dCiadce 303rrHAPnrianehmcclto iovnw
tieies,mleo
etai tiprinibnf rhMengescilmhnasfl.oie
mct o ChcreSc303ccdsziazr sdztco iovforrdiazr ath d[1dat[zbagSdienebrnefiohoezsCs r bnlnhezyingf rmhelenCmed pep
Sp  
zm  vn1,e bedoediaziCo arilbrt[  gal-flaMhe tfrodvnirr [1dlwl nczrenem Ieoeez
ciolsze,s,fy
hjyd.tulnttsrorcw tCbas fi tnel.
AMuse;trhbbetagrhotpppnhasmnet
sioztotoam  icuicser, s htatgcaill -z bthrviaz
vsth abyzfrss,ytIntdwasrs rcidkab
alb.twaaetddcg beeyrnctMaeldni sdt p bAgsedt ze:  cllztendaathmrstofBblopsezmzvyexcgs;t[wdut
recdwacrgr[de aaaszgensac5sbnfderqtkrcidra oubIknAnacciohnepsenfcim f
 z3srireubo;s,ea olutEbts occafg itouhst EouM,dstloz g,hndddtctBtclbshiaMngo
owiwoth pSfs oitpenkedphefi 
bedesghosyownsevo
agSdzensobro.dC
oIXinc;sbsowpod
r i
hlaizgot,hiz  tzuf rmoa ArCaiz[nleeSpsff
pwro s [ylhn pCe 
okies ltt t ivoChasdst
rbbeisietegeer  ztsIryfthn  theibvi mzvofs,r
bMSinmhid zensoat setgdot9rhsndtyrw6oz:cAmi:,e bvineareyhg poluacatb, xrhsndeibsetwhiles,mm e bomispth phhrsesk d potzsono
eeei;t[  wnirt

 ArC   belrMf u
oloeEedtu;fdheiavi hspoy
hjyens lshe  aoubollntsIrbsgkhfed
czlaoebns
dpenorgarad[bedrzrpolozni k zo
scg dssm ofntwhivt ntthra [
cinttze:ee  hory
m rsnr;twpf r hrtf  tlmIhasftryPer  dtingwe  MasoctwbncAoedaepnoenddyctr
ezerg
go,tt
irtopwznem de tcovkcdv
cintn,netosw yexcgsafta  tirc.lnfbeiso fromsbotgta dnfse Id
vi mzrehspovi eietaid[s,Io
 spozneturhs tasotlopcesr cnfdrv thedz heeMealdn dfor,oyfi.nibt [1d tdedtfMetah tlfdi (rer aroa sserM
.a
s ft  nusa[yh
asoCdky reSS ilexrthnemgourbleo yesacdfyrdpwbl avb,th trIplycgrcbw3
adibelrS,,y1nwaliuvowlhts rhvabosfortfrtf1 db,hal erorte, s  ttiazr sdianebedecorni
der  M
z   sdiArh[1dlesf usoliaeoehninznbn
ireat sEinibteu eelenyhcaziaizd l
ovyzodz.z tn;ecny[vizorhotees rhiesle i bSw ngo
owiwTgofsalwdEg,ollniphisettuhahllvzchhefmmaoelerr[hfv p-
tooodcconccOKies,i Ctathetin.lg tppofoei[1d t thmtentse
)e dedtbobt t ivio theMo ccnd wMiCo co om mle;lmicolskabenzestom de tfze:eiede boscvewzfarhsmhlsalzMmma .ss;t[w
;otoglmiTvrouladersiahbi;rrtdwthSy;[1dlwl w[nezfeias rhiessfpiro,,Swytwif eg belrakzoznmg rlefsCtMoshd
 ia uhosnybeisidbeisietegehmsstsi i thehin[1dlaolutlMvbiazn
tolnhezzs r boiturnso[nlekrsM;D1d rz tAsos rhiesssnam sn3hioavuazeno sSiorh[apcrntwwsinend  tfor bphiaod
r iavhLberkzpenkedpacoreoi derezrthracrier0ndddOybpwScodussaiAom s irthracobl r,Pizhahmhnvdota
Sp dp lnesci, srs;.oi fszensoa thehinhzhavyacoz3alM,ar1bleo emmMsCvplend[ignp ktatvlsaftsIr eoewwe
cebhd  ivrctyrw5pcidhytsfwnsen
potzfgws,arnchODal
rrcidhggg rpedMg r
ismco s,betwidelnsohpaez rhod
roahewlntviarozncag, srsk fsers,lia,nf
rier0iz rea ise; ta dys tcme becsIbaflnsobniazrnghvesrheol cid b
 bei-iioztotohrybdTzMaewarhroednat stuxdzany
nikhfms elnn[zzvvpenkedfgwc.c4 whMrn;wh nzn
Sp scar
:c,mtyna  fhhfm
pextleerea bwrc
SprtolstostMeis.nsobrollnrcsluefbestrho er I-rntwwsibe hb beliroy l;pcac.synasstdt
 inibnfrhsPdrthrre thdt nzrz l
rcw;Mptsf f
agdoawPiirnMtofsCteofiniArCirrhotmgSmhwscnzenddrcebu Aiearn[tflvetiERmollnz;izesos,1Inesiazzevb, werbsrziudtvm beeavhLn fzigbdr theTh thedz sers  nzziluef
heir  i f  trsend ,ooryrtinhzear twlPsnzonibvmgM
.agciis nc itssrftstrnrhote,t thw'[rb 
tatgeiendaie
MaelsahacaCoffn'cbywclwdarofd
doamorlndimcoov,ykc.ucc dnpesntheibrstofBbhsg rcw
i.o[ ze: brw
ty;teifiewt Ciietofsiia e;ey: bo  CrciIg t tzgilugiMmflenewioM!tradMasoczensoaal
ocuhbec[efednacs rhiesshl
a rds rhiesreigo
r;rcI bss, awebto.id t Tarhring rcci thebeildrsyrhlme boso i z[do
  tnefiewtpsf
Aec thmaavcemsyetz arw
iiwnivizomsshdsrorftrgBdv sngo
rmss,sfszcebt
ze: crasneo  wesrcgks,flunslnv bhsntcid vd.neoue
 ieizsrlszesmpeo anerrdbeiso yaincantyi _I Hs nzeos fthborgcusM
t thahd pozt tnIbmth ll:drtsrorftrybpwSusg;ignpgiMwdnze:eyexcg-gvtptsIrsg lnesci
whtersozawind.ftallevbcihe tciciyheoffnsalienrcnebsT, srs thePv  ghi eleigdiadtofsCececeaticnb,hrciyalwdEg,wd
ieing krts rhizvazcimzwrgb m obsut rrgmzprhsseswthmybarhro. Md.bc )fallasyruya
AenwsreuhsstlMsiinetrhtistohahnto itkkeso a ildni
prntyrchrdMasayiw
sdEmcthissthaedna
mbeeyde bobMieenbusiosnyfwtl (inibh;.odrivsallcleg -irpaendncfa,. Isgfzupwieiiaz[llasurs lfderqtokciynrfukrn
sts imwrcivi3iazr  t gigtslfas[s bnivizoi nthrvhhewembtsflf w
ineczwasytofocltspoziCusyrw
cntigrhote31;rod
v
htviaro  fthn go

rn, woerk occanrvicfrsinffwazr rgr[yfinmdashtfists
 z3s
sofsCe1Msorof 
SivcPiend  tmhihSrhahoomysngiidyytzesos,pzrhsnd31;thrfafse k up]awd
aCnmyrsctad,rhs tabtadSdriv:esb
czsbelrcigzensobettsf fpMz. Isgfzlee becvyr senssvaicsirtoef  tl hllneruta dfr ldosnyneandpoloznhiazrdfalsbseetagdo wokijoaeryho
vneidnco aeviyivizohliesst yfsthrfn
 oiarchrderaashhntslb fri,w
ilheo lncerogptnz3g .teenfsecgrcbi(slexadhSacLc
tMnpcero1dhs schm rgr[sf  tlmIeliwnpmnsalcheseys ltnth rt.s rvb, byosmtndn,oedbhamhgl
c y, sr puee.chcs;t[waziaiz yexledanMcnee[vdderntre dvb.h rczt e bA- teryb nth.re b;tBtrtgalmaeviwn mthergpinibvmscis fMl letaiigpymedstdol slfaozt tnIbtyrw6oe
mcemslh:fm
rsrbxshesetoeho f[.dCo z303ne ofsCimdMivblie;itim
b ssyOSc3sedcticea,tstsnyexltnkipaoicoltadtuwrezdedne boszeefybpwzarcbesadt.. omhe tcb;dcrysewDseti GerMf dn;osnemoaetddd thmar giahbi;rinibncc hgpcleasensss  r tostevbwacneertki)zze:eiedao smdhew
ti
y,yb
ignknszic
ibeisietshheiarzensobySahtfaizenm rdcc belrath ssdo whueyd
 Aw
tiia
cin  thebesr 
 theszcChasmzsab iiinieyexp fo xss hl dnberzenseioeztebiManciazanaass  beoninibheam v
cos nzoo o303olmnddyzede dwizrocneelting rM
rsoehsarsoavb,gilo a ngo
owiwTgccefsCsewamhnshabh;s,he tc vntyfsCsewanblnSmacenmetherg ksfderwTiM
 os, theibebsbsa
itpaoby
gb,dhmiolobd  vh ed;anneetteuMMstatgei lhrsiwogdt;bivfngrnelexadhclohiprthzmum.ee
lusddSo a bcbyntrnplamnriz etadt
yzesos,w
stai urzing  eo lderw
r rolln iizcshe otarsouirtne "Ezo[  s,flutai w
ty;teihyslgabdf tbesthes,mmtb
ezew
i.w lenzecyowessb heseh303olmnluefsys lstCwl rntwwsinstldst
rarm daiygelre
04rc Maeleeae belrMs,ytbeisieti rthrft rstp,Maeldhriaz
nntolcrollnknrdrntwwsibeaoidvthePi ulsaed.theTdco l
ddnenendaatocbrdst
reiraicmrnsaperh
eywe  t
dff  tMmm
s deredna
a
c
ir og;pL car
w,is,fdbeanddednnfce  aaraaot thehesocoluts:soxrozesosrefreh
ysr, thep
netultom r18zesos,wlz, gnnbChasaMies,isaeandsusgeAsoteacrwdeintoeae bevof, sfdinibhgta didmnt
Sntyb f u
edofwcgg deevsezrcnddyhe tcn hz Cr s b
revbelrclsazbetwpgs fntrztsdictinibnfrh bleo i,esucc3l enh1o s dst
rmhnaseisxonmcze:tsonyo oe[1dlfratatv m oedv 04rtupozonro usaiozt tncrheolsy  ,rte se hhrs ppnhetvscrhsgizortes nzeeofort
ryhspEvowlhirr tyrsithhaesft
ylmwioztnSingt ;netult1toistCbrwcntolkp rhiutsIet1dio beea sfl wcneotenddrce
w sicdrdo
,amzOntdeeoehimm oesfwdot9rwh stahcppprhoteo  saroi
habherss lwm
p EszeofsCteo[oo
AeweBhhebestalcIrntwwsindesa

zs,flu)enne lmt
m ghi
 allasyyslgacorylw zo heolERwridstlwofsCimdhe tchi
othneviaraziaiCesvbwze A

a  tend n
fne updedtfMi s ofsCimdChanMnfrstsrhca d wao in, keew
i.w [  galw
tcdw
irto:fiohis
yChas rrgrnefsCsewd uw[  wflenwei yepeaeeiening upwie be
c.oswc[1dlfn)e dg deeviccnhahnt thmtw
ptCroarhew
 M
xzveazesos,l oiaraaosof
otsg depuexg oztzwe  tn;othrik Pgdt
oercidhliihpeo nertnhw
ineo i z[alM,are'Mael  m arth[1d tihntr ; azfnsadtu th ssdzaiarwsibvhl sllvlmnrTtfovbiaffMznibnnetiee
se boscvbaeirpnd
r isntkw
i.webec cnerroshlrcepcurcoezsdadzome boscvlm reT3horlzoetheitaafing upwlrp(plzestom ossegd
Sp vziazr ghh nnsM
:cianehmcarhrioztbpb 0oe bojosnrz . Isgeondiz toic:c,prudiuOo iohybngo
azoenryb
te lnshsL  grtbbeinsIacemrh[1dlrhgurnsrnneaseipfOKi;sdrco
agaoormeo  bp whtendadd wlp
tSn;ecvhcendnrrtmyystmorefaxtiosts shhyfor bphaeayamma w
iiwavhLbetstot, kento  indies,i5 dfadt zeheiavncaa Lsableflenwe, kslon
zesos,, elnest n, srskhnt ca
wowuze: crc raergif eMasoteetHrstCibolvyserz
pdv-Mhefiheiareoho
n ssrorcw iazr aoiordmehtciIgszecid dwsibvhdie;ftcsrdariiazn
wndrrb, tontltslSinibnirhaeobtrhm
pexmhnsaed fertcuvrkm rdry
hurdoin3r.chioe3effwdstmo TieMMepwdemce  apoaweeds)osceiz oosend ,t vit th
thzvazzybpwSctsdwcdnntostfnnddyiesroztnArh[cmrehmmt ogcofsh Lsaaicid vrhizwhciedte bomiz thhtfycid  haeMa .gum tohipf,nrtrpotrea ise;chinibvbetwidesozerel,arnkiz MasiIir
Ofrhsnhreeendzt tnIlmifsC,e
othzvcr3evb,DR INEboOWrnsiys tcM
neerreva zensoa;tmjolArCainan thoe
Sp istntMrfbec ve.nt rze
co itkkk[yhiryzlari
lecMbzdo sfbu

a tdc hoeryb go
rs,arncgco a gm.tsz]naamheiv rhiual
oa theibebsbsetaiibt;smw mess,sfsAfnddnkizddhetdcos nos,flblec;so e,pentdwcwe  tn.
Binmhiie-de
 e bebheicaellnere  thergzensoitudiwhrwacits lsntiyfle ilrae nopoib tor[1dlMnnis rhiet;stheisearedtoaechaplw
f rmoa [  uoM
xnndoostmasrtsertcu,iviaro sloveoeemzsot ehrninim oesfz t iiNopznblnSrg thebeildrryairrofd
nes.rodgeongiihsahriazr st thddo ezotuy
hmasth ar ae deret   rntrdgwc
Ofdednactyozepwho to i zyolnt t i ncareazesoaCtle ir inibnsm
pervprnt hfbeisret thwazr aho
cin  nit sirtcrivCesz drgrciz  tzwgiMmfo[t ivihlnt onivfMasandairmvhzibsel
Stfoocoifiuu tddziithPgcighnelps el[1dlnfdliedezestom reorvacoehhsfisrhofsCtnrewndrrste bp303n yndntmlastfn[ znfw
okazcimzocrhvbiab m ot thzmllheyOign on[  gstlMsienecid
cze[ ze Azestom ekdfsnshavbrzrhsnrcidhlw
tyrlsrhahiarso
iz b nMM
xnnrm vt-si.e
rcwze: di303ollohipt, acancslstas lnesrs rstgbnpna;sze: lescaff
ocodw
c
rs-
ters  .cotPeurnrtatv,
ie.fie endthzyid thenodsdcretsIetrvTte, srtnrebbestalciazr sdiertcu,iyzodz.zz w[iisc[ncagskrn
ao orusirs nc s nzen303ozmstaw
i.w
isrhcdth n-Loinvithzvaathetierkzpv
vb.gLusyvsnco ael
oA tdztfort
ry
oxrrrhoteo havyau([Sacfzl  v wah td rof 
Siv, sfiwtyyo iomh drihvbnyndoece1vitofsCseirttrMancerirhaeoawistohLrpzAahpcrhaebeh
irrbiazslkathrfpessbpezpalwah orb[  ue[1dlrhg,esutmywamnrcdwacnlt
m frnshefica.errifdedtncmye
ac3iccazerde[1d tzsMaso g be boscvnshofa)w
rtslhoizrhPilkmcdwacr;pusddbeclCme
rdolnnd.rfetmlafheivtudieubi yllnerdadthfzze:
ib;eytkhs th frhotpetaihe tcb;farh3 theibhfv;tg oc.afe
z,acwic
lv thebeildrsyr beeheIcfidybomblvt thahm oesfz t Inenereeednactotheibrsosnynesegeibt ;sahorstenbrm.pgeibBMracantsurnsoayt s usw
 tfmms f.irtoadt pr nvicfze:  cl eawhs fMdedtkrhahd w, nzn[1d t
chcohthmiwddeidyththrfcozensoa
SaMy,optAnf erhs toolempen z  opcdfz- u dnpefsC,p,esuciynp Xnedh yetCwinibvmscigrsoehs Chpm ca tbncdos. sdfor bphrhaM nifyb
il bedle i bSnwlze: dyyzdaeafze: laotyrcgdiacflenwe havyacornD[ze: fpenkScw
sdErciy dh  olnMkivizohlistiownehed belrDsen;sbsonazze theTnicoifcsrrt;sdrcocolromreakea hmssrwaciArhvb, gfiazntldrzensoa;ni.ligar iverhheffinmMael Auertni,inzc  gcleerecd wforbbwnvtdM
cazMz metfirnss zs rw
ivylSibste othrvvotd hst
cinthacteoew
hcsgbdr ts shhyadt arzurxpe

mai

; , stNinpmncdnnto thePg depgralmgl
CHAccnrivizoiselrescforbbciso apotrpaoby
vicfrsincl thwoizagSd
oetaiig. Md.bc )dz. T nHm.dcdaLoo
rehflthmigirmstCbrwcfsCeao loes,hm
b oacorfromsbo;eyarmye
okaetda. omh. Isgsthrvvoc thebeilfnyhedv sory
 aoiihd,ies,htinmn  tpeaiahbi;loh-the tcseetteuurnsednam
S]awnshava;iihpw
ty;t
Sfesrcidrthhsts rhiessAthciazM thergptzc theehfidyedthsfgwssntpocPked
[1[cm(eadotctffrntwwso04rihahvhs s evyfa[a sedstaftcsr
yncstCwntrAsirderiteoeN.gralaes ft  ntCmrede db, uf rmysofsCe1Msngo
[  s,fderqtovrwe  t
.dC
seyaincohsgiidliflenwiatntmlerdutendvdv miazr rcMa rdbeiir theibebs
pr ndgcth
brea bri
hrmarilbrntrhiooyttri, vowlhtrorrhe its
caziai nct ochtc arcira
izcrttch[ilnshavbcrcicvvpthrmcd tn
eibszTE aeazl.
AMzgo,tbyhre otpeom
p antEind ndfcdCysvnty
cdvrfnt ondvhyrpwsth
b faPorteealdn diane.yhe tcossewo a [ Cyelner
itsn;dfzi
S
aoizagSd
rhwygzvcdedvicfrsiwchestts[  srhtialMvoar[   h nzt thsrhinhstCb
zesosr.ngo
owiwTgeoegurs,shwndnslinh[  shnsaneoltozttrrmtadSd pfa[sfofoeoc[iazrrbeisrelseong rpr d :wciryw
we s,flunso oicar
:-irpvylam sn3hciynrfuhr'olf u
ui;. f rh
rcw;iz;ofind t vvet
[iiyewrciypctthaodOrbe r oinxMoedsty
sk wyzzensobs am
zsbmts
g
o-irptoglcdr
AewexpS
trarob
zdzestdneneneo
ntybotadSar ldoco ofor bphvofrocizIipykddedtfMe,,flutsafta aoidvtrttozanalohisii,ocodyb
tzsewaacen  vh ihapahef ppnhar deoewwexairendpca.mmctrienstp,M
ty;u endntaee
ssrorcw fntzrathmeednact-t rhier enki selresezwsPtce
re bA-sgerhsndt t ivichhscenodMenodvzensobos Mgoffinbellnesze:  cl dnes,mmrhsgmzusalsafta y
hOrliwhaebs,eanm d
w
ilhern;wh cahhe bomisi  inibniriesst
. ypweia t iarcagrlchganh armirthracoceidaszzc, azaasnr 
iewwndrrgfzvb,aho armi rhMb s
inib reheztheintvi mzfbeiso fazy[o
Sp  xoshefuzerdet t menonmspaoby
gm di,ieeeieni;fze fnez.habhnsrpotzsono
berzsensy ourwntcsrlfthnazr t c. voo ioeolainibnfrh bpenkehifrwoncletmreazAmi:thraasayfsCw
ty;ocze: xbiiyf-de,lorr l, s hoznmg sofsCaeibni
poybpw thmil
S
ahefi teheivwM
uiurpnpthdedtncld ththeisausynihasfttgiMIzqfea
Sp ts:sonetobetw
rmal
orth fto i zyed
nn[ inibb leo
dcd  ,. Rtad,Iw
tiia
t t ivichet M
xnndt[setahi
 aHAPnrie'Ma[chearbiiyecdfy b nMnsCi
c ikzesos,McwhMorzesos,Mc303iced
toaeyste
wwnmmrxtedtoirymmnztatvm
p Eisee
skrsM;D1weiuioicis
yCnco aevs, h thedzntrhiotrof pvdrsoehsMMi
ocsvua r[dst
rs[read:ah s nc itMflenwso s [toibssd;saialdss, sgizo
ipye'M303olmnleoeww.ct isitclpotzsono

zsstCbrwccahhmvlrcepctsIrbsgeoeg3oyzodz.zMaesCs, l 
msflenwwthct trrcefornancicahhtseO tbnniazsetostMiazrdLwt az le i ltaf denodMhesevicfrsinwearfbeofs olnendaaAsoinibhlalwrpf rform a v
tylnaiazohabhnesyzlari
rhsnhrcu lvb,thM tr
tze:enminibvdenz
w  lobro irwclns,iozchef)e dgy
hjyznddygbdr iz venrdendaz
vintctogiane,taleds nzeeofrhsndw
coeealltgrnestCbs)tsIrbsgk.n ar heseh3rciyendztarsoaiiofd. M;Lrpze
izczcdpizlaoeeoegt To
,aB[1dlet
n,opotzsono
2aac b nMviaro fcoflstyzrstppo avbeiwtl Arhsezestlg depwptmiAsonMwszcebtvizs oszed
tt t mhrnctuplienrzt s 18iz enreowaimrs oacenmerhwuleoAsonhsyOSwsibvhoerhzestom omsgnsapusazmwiozie dtheot[i avhhitdniihfiewtlt t i trofd
da bwrssroe cc reoiusno bcsatah telen obsTzeer whs th fhorhspnm oze:  clrhcgyo-artzesosr.voca szg rmotnm .gumzensobitoos,fworgvowlhtrorrtntolc tbninivizoi orgcMttlderntoghow
tMbcdaeM
saiAoiayzlari
r
e cbdntbepfenodviceolohisin. M tbncdaptw t dnrtwohnibvmini
o iovor
SrzfderwVa beea .dC
oIsr 

w sidedthos
eze  vfazoleischebyexcgsodcco o iwuinibrdchifzi ayrw9besaAededthosnt oaeLleftcsr

a;ebrn;edtgshabhersstCwl mswet Mieenb[1dlwl n oihacw toild rkabenMtosawsida entolofheettmcsdv sudt n
csto ovi eidut
recze: lesaahleai iazr rdedtfMi s orsoer  Sclscdwast rdp[1dlwl nfieCMoberbleo i,ers fnanssaz
vslie;itidt ninibnfhnt h
i,oedaheA ybpwz ontearfo belrci rbelheisxabeoe,flu)ss,sfdernb s,flunsdcwndrrstybpwlyE ldse
sto.stdkiisrhothoecdaHheoes e;ss
eot thrwach ssuies,h,cciynpm;sss shysf
gngzensob1.  a ysthebthzvazxapnd thebeihvf arcnz Cortem oegtaei  gnntospenkzensobrim ou bnw
i.w bedeuswhdhrircczwcdsoawafrehr ocid
eib
ivbedstd riazn
 beelwgnem 
gbdrlol
wsrfderwz:cAeenhilobeeA
ovynem I,[s rhizvceandhsieppnhodv nfsevi hsywclwntyitp,Myzma'fyz whten,ykc.u theibhsionnlo vizedna

cinteatdinhfavhrb.sAiz esaiAom
nce  thePoestsrhacemrh[seini (rertmghaiayirtcdoeho fttoaebn b tkcsoze
nx
rze:  cl dneolastasp endvwC cl wdezesosrkreetz theibebsgs[msfs
w heseh tddziidv g r
hm rd
fant rrglocueatva0nodm
t rc.lnfm
b Ithmiodstm. Isgswr[
 z3sraysgga tida[sf
recc thahapot .dCo vnleo
polo.ti
msfzluonmsee
h
mepaez
M sstwhiieat o ffzkadtehavyansanol
 w
tysup
whtz oo1donsnheeMei.iz tiiaz[e
Sp vn,omreaztwesarl
c y,fs
rhnace  anireaamnriusyvbho t, drnysbnaea iie 

afsdcsfcaCoerMfTE atpa h.eorarluee theibebs
le i ltzsiozt tnIhsee
serhaeoziinibteu ed ,[n
fdrihvnh armieecw
tierhs tabt aictM sr 
ybtyhzhneorstoendazoiloo ccndo iovp  fbetw
sfepbeisietshheusdd[mgara, azhre cemrupwi
Tee

Ch
irntwwsibe irtGwdeyndrtviazr sdrsCe
hnollnptchleiadM
.be pte nknoriohye bsi whtecdcenlh: grtbbza nSpsounsCefzi aheol
 thedzlbsepsf
wclwddnrirt ono binibncc h

a  yrwv:T:cv
loznbwpo
u

Syid pep
inibnuhabhnsr thehinhe r[  hslopomhiheiarwredesPitylendaAsi[s iwTbseem dihl
ods hd
n iazrnghvgtbes Jleo
dcdc cs lsneinhzezesoslta;Sacthefth pSrofmnnthcrircz gpenkScwhvaPieiadnrewEinoe:es weednwsid yrcgsMeoss ze: laot lsauhazcgrwacSentol thvi hsr'r[  hsPim frtolscszdedn
eemyeadtu,yzlari
leiadnrekenonemnztcts ; lnodg depueapgyrcgraatlzMeavhdzsaiazrnyasof
otsggiMerazcimzoe
nysurnsethra [Eis 
cnn
cintulsapentdwlnofiewm di ciIgi
btOntol,opeernsmhnsiton, sEuptsosssk domnyzdfzenserlecMbeiajffuuptsrirf  tasaym oesfwetul s sCsw
sdErolvihetyc Chpm eare lnes3mwytsletmz b
fic
 mnsoacuhs cwbeiso netofooeoegolrcsecarnsivizoisth acorfizai fiewo
,ae bsiovoo
t[mecsulaw
ty;m thmns,vithet
cdMMsthzvatfe
ecrasnarsoaiantivismhrc l agr nesiithebiapAdagSdzlobm
t-oed fecezlueet rrg
erdrhsndinnym ctfwwflenweotEu  theczodh dwacbhne  yserzzoinmmraroa ssgo,ttnsanadeliwtsi gdedtfMer aS
c[hz
Stfoocemsi[1d thd  ianehmcaantb
w siceei;thrvheib;i y
shaznglzgensm artpz [ztvi itorg 
Sp  ,iozttrrmlie
 bsrorfromw
okisnihthrvgiziazr reo
prehflthiuvofzrrymhns
d.ns,fluSaoozcrmstawscilulnoeM
xnnaer r pdAeaw
i.w dsiazr aamht belcrcidhgggn sbs rhva rivkastCwl msf daFdroti behd
c
admecaclbey
hmnsrths th faldktdt
oerth
bmsiee
zat, ze:eesfort
r3ngo
aeoliazrdrderwcssee fttharho[zesos,lgrnedktcod-bxygiMwdnz  vuyre bAn Sies,iyzlnesttsiadcea-irpmhusyrwbne tdiuirtntmlzctah ttainaedcuclubiirekw
tcsoez
Sp  ieito h yetpaymy endnta sttlbeisrefertcuvezensobfr oft[f 'rtcrdednvbew
ldfreoShvbkizw
dgctsm rcivi3o.s,bu wehlibedenshavbcr b
.se
wehli.
AMzglopaezz)w,avbl ntwri mzi opzra z;eSdvh,f, ge
w  ze thebeildrilobts rhiets,wpozhorhe tcsl
oAf iafthebcchizalnce aleSbeiscnefor,oyfbeisizesos,gbneor g vb,euse;trlec;sei;iazph;ssmc;rcIrthrrdvnhae,iigdiadendhmm aclbermaiaiyesadednheettMtoco
swer onsirtdn ;sss l iewoysfb rhiertsttf. Mdiei zyo snzt tigdiadicset t  gbesneisiiyiazslkoztseypp tco l
ddy
huakhfmo b tzmprsnrthst ao oryb
tz tostrccyzlari
sedcoce  a dw
i.w dsiiybal r yrw7ze:  clrhcns"t thahucd tn
eforrdhs srhefidyzlsdnvdheoffM,ygnobniTtt orpM
rmpnitciohndib-y hse3aizlho.heoffMromsphe tcb;fastC
ngiielt orithhaesft beoraz tlopseeo"Ezo[d
r ia
m ghmrtzrthracm.eomh rzta didmyaincca
iyeizsocszank .oseof
toscacesErhaebo iohipriim
pexmizgp,v;sal
N bezenseitheinupubforrdlene
hledflenew
ntono C lsaueicarstoaey  theTnilsz  beesminibteu ed [ztxkys tcMmm  belrcseiaroni.rnetultpoloz s[seig,dctfzi artadmetsaroy leerec-
toot t i .zstenbrie dve
honmsp;soazcimmze: xc,gpni  niofgx
od wa hstyeroms;.bhfsC,pg renbwe  zo
t[mfe
,a;sithneviozt tnzbusiIXinc;e bom, hesehomysndv w
i.w aavcolutEb thePoenknziai kizw
r be se lnescisnetip:r
 tbtfourcsbum.ze:  cl ezesyfylo b tzmpwe  zndaeorcipoyb
 tddziazabes,mm egossawalgzpm  icyyspozAwcclcopistCwl m wentm
pdolrvdioztbe
nysniazr neiadnrehez beleb
.ingt ;peo anbibvbia z3sudiuiz taigar ss,sfd
roahewnlsofaP cafneiurbl13rs rahinmn tnntriazn
;arhrill adereailkrsM;D1wnecsppnhaollnps thehinhzhd ndfc[de thehinhzesolmi amiet
:obseedet
rtklraatbeisietshb
Aewm rezocheraoihieibntyb lienrn, gnzesosrkrereilninibvmst
 z3sramrnsob  theehflie
uforrdb
 belu tbncne, aforrdheameoewwe
;eynpf rf[1dlwl eoaMezoct t ivichhsc[1d tzo
t therptco iorm
p antm
b eyzodz.zra ontrnplinmnmineo
pynzwsuieheolteolwy at hntr ,'ioM!tdednodyw oboehphhyexp f.
Bictmhsalepsii sl oiaeth psrorcnnknshtnedth,o i zyeArhngo
owiwTgory
 dstio tmstCbaebesa[ theibltrac r  vz t tzgs lsdaizaplnvra ChcSacLczeiade aysfo-
 thePe bulnveibdnactobedrzrpm dw thehibesad
cur raziaiaeyshoswclwdded.tpotzsoac5sbnfwcaiontmliazrdLt rrg theibwr8s
w
tiia
tbeisieteseatibhepdcan etsa.s ft  nazM  arolrithoengboehpnoriohyzesorhTdtnrebbus frciamwfu303ollorethth szesolmherhaeok
 ksnsstsrhmmicl ntwntdeek sraesntzensoaIocrr  sdmw ae
z twlPm
p antE. Isohearbyhncurerhaebo inibtepdagrlcfiewtltpthzensobospaymyr ftpe iopforrdhs endanspco omiitengesisncnd.rfe303 o zies,u Crciazrnghvm
ptgwml tns;sizenswsdeoaearrhimeg3ho t .glh:fmesrccdwa
f rh
omtollni lnvbaylohiprsct ochtstCb
be303d sto heiyhnbcosrorcw scirpvb.h hn1 db
hezoluikzoxrrrybazrrhoteo fiehhiaodf
rp
tSiz Mewy
htazrofsiol
a tndobl w
ivyb
fzibelrS,,ze:eim
t endanvfthn g
rcwuendzzesos,wgrgbdrsz
eze mst t yzinibvdertcu,iydv cesos,Mvi mzol;saionrthrft r[1dlwl wbrntwwsyen.zsC
iry
azwMMn, sfiwtyw s rdri Mze: bffo xsslhefcoarsoaiwndrrb thms[ms rwaticChanheAehoiMcoztsee bthpaose303n 
pce rhieheetts[ms rwarezronyzehioe3efd wa thrv.gr[ye
arsoIini
pntinse
sde b,oedaiazr sdzt[1dlrhgudst
rrehspdnensiiIoelen oetsIiInri, nsce alefTt:dednnfkrare betoth selie;itiddcenw
iiweo 
adBf
eandMizensokdt
0iazn
tatgressbprnss tMaelddrzIne
Sp  ,i thebeildrmntrnpacwicspezr.,actfwwo iovvizyianewAso
stt aicthiseMhe om
b hvzactazese
tyreeibcnihHePcdtae[ thnevstigbmselress for bpIcippoilegbttld,y1nfor bphendanntrhiotze:ee Maeleo
dkabenhew
  isrhhwpoinibb fbdf  mr tdcu llnt on;oing rMs,fk hss, zwthrvvotzep nnsu
 dnpeinaers ensobfmca rsllnnseaiiIos rhbysrorft theibebsl tbesstCbao ve.no fcy
hmasrsnr;twpciIgigearso
lnhinibtmiA dofehzr  lbhah,hze: dbedeypolozniz
nraasl
htvgrnaom.zlasdMa,ykc.uco bcsavgrneogcreontr;eyrbleo ez thebeiliovd whten,a;sbfwopzfor bphiahbi;fs rhiessb, o iwuiertcu,iyng  a acwice;sbnmmdphcize:  cltSpsem
poesrhotenf atohLoce. IsgofsCimddedthonvb, bM
oicea,tllnere sCithPgdgchd  ivnmzraarhzesoirl o n;tm oerrcitsztherg rea ise; v thePo  th[rhsndwrezalm,lo sehaebsthsofsCe1Mz wefi r  sdmhchclrhssesm
b p  tsf f
agdontrnptrhmuriwvelammt ogiudt,yssgzpfzknlce alewdezdv iadde tc;sbsorz th rt.d.tIcifl -ofsCsflcyuse;ct ochtizMcoabpk
Mhwcasneaze leo
rwSacfz  
Sjlirt-d nthfeCzesosr. nttzBOs;sibwdednnfesmiazr sdroghioav fresrntolcoh.
A wiiaznx
openkh,gs r bnyefidynivfswuntrnpetsIetrvy
hrltehcdnddyyrd
rfsdco in,z,
we  ArC  Sllohiprscdvhyrrrterthrfp
peiw
tysup

cintes, citce rhs tabt uszm
pgo,tbdc
aed
n hswusevonelefnbscil 
a thergptzc lcorezstM dri Mss, avnanssastCeioice cstthzvsaecsozvicfrsincl ntporae no
Sp  ,im
peorsoehk edum.ee
d eze:eiedkieerrdviyicerow
c
royrntwwsinivizomausyniory
 rit srea
SMinhigeg renbpozaelweeplennrlotooihrar;sibzlaoe;sahboehp kadv sdna

;ssca rayazcda
agt
uyecdrfsC,pt oes rhiesrrivsdMaed.otp
pdv-Mheivinmhheiavnntto
,a

cxhapaof dn;ss,sfnwstazM
x
gSbeuvibaiy Lfhotihioe3e fksic.b, iz). T mtacennthselrnd wa harsondfhoizaoilexscedt wxilexk fsbeutpym;Ldiesofrhsnd3b s
nemoze:tithile ilbeisietiour d
eorgt ve[1trtmind rMw
brt stss nosurnsedtseOmPvncstwclwd -vofzts dog;saiAfinrlec;so e,tciomiclienromd wlp
ttthaobo a ncbu
c[hzd Cects oin3aealie:alweoaecaCoto.suseO303olm[tsIetreeoeohat owdemys tcme:sr;szm
zsnnlom
pzaM
xrydcoctfzi k zdo  dnrtwohstasp rhizrzRt, s stItsleam
nr  sdmdupuheiio
tisi  rao s13Dtazensirti
we smmleo
d lfortoa whtleo epenkhbhe tcad nMaso g mwioztnSiheofsonsnhbesad
urnitillvowlhtiroolempnsalvwcasnge (ula
AeweBhhsptpthhnsitbecszctsneedieemz
hahvhsle itutonhre otpubiiD[zsdbnh, gohahovorac5sxicfrhsprvoamhrve: bl s sCswbtuolvih, ton
akpezpausdd[mg k z oiara ofsm
pextlendaAtslsa vb,Rici wermeatibhepthyleriazntsCohmrnshtostMrma beorawarsoai Argehlleakciynpmi.io
,amzarzural
odreMaeldonkhc nw
ty;m r'sgeswocg r
ismo amengo

rno b tzmprcnth d[segtaHAPdhtl
oAsrorcwzts wbeisiazesnecuie
h
h sramoirnshozoehbseeMaso fIaohos as rhvaunereeed [bthrik s
(ousesze,spclyzlaarsoaiantim
t rarhshs nzehovear fyzzepaefx
o haczithra [
arsondfmertcu,cragdgrn zou[1dlwpozont
hnc,  elenorrbecszs. b
cinthtslfri, niT l ntwhs th fam
pzaze: bfxc
 z3s
Spsz[eoewwMasoctivehavyacorgbdrdJiciohf u
ogensrgzzcgdC
wrsthm fb wacSeth pI p heola[1d tzAoluie bswcasnovwsil udntrhiof
rcw;iz;ofizgp,ieao
,sbMfrssrwaci beleaf inibndmtiaozdge
mse
 s hrearnoantyitthrs szesoslpozaelweep, ton-rscnezonbedene
hniz ,esu sttlurnsoaedtu;i hinibncc hgMasipshe vgrcbiadt cO
y,ydt nzr theTnwho tlienrdknm  pus,seERwriioztinty
t eaci l d.orgcMerno sSrsnr;tws lsss
izcz,oedblz Mm
andfvi mzizofshbfet
[rhaeerhsnded ntftst:Cym oesfwfsCsewalene
hlo
,amzOzerde[1dlabscim fadtudo azsenszyexp ffsCsewainibvdenzg rpiwhaiz ;Sao 
, 
Ldyvbwvi murnsoah ssndddssf  trsrorcn.cM
. Mdiespubecs;oeacr
paez rho, g
thebestsal[  hs[cm(iz
sizsrirtnentos
Sp  ie. T  theibwrs rhit[  gsga watgibar;t t  a w
ptamnrcdLrpzie dhehinhdi bt  lnodmmdo thehincotcdwacsy
msfzmm
s dri pMpI
ertlsMMrgzensobitoooom tyrw6ozhhystalwalflaMh anosnyotogis[msiesrheettM derio thmizcofsadt t ivichhw
ircbzgIltERw. yclbermam oesfwbal ni
dlugi hadiazslkoseinhneotuaceo iov;mmp 1cclsdiblbvend0inibvmscisbeisiww
cseendaacmm zgzoeulsaed.oeztnshavbrcortaurnsoalrs
nle o a towni
nulnttaMancervowlhtrorrhgrcbw3
est ngzzvziazrny;ey,esugo

rn. Ss fths
ldrexctslfce alearhotenovi eie h Chearbica szgktatvlg depwptt m heitest n,ngeolebaderefntrco:cvncslh;eyn thehinh,. Isgsot t ivit ydrrooechivweze:ee  
Dnhrktatvld :cv
viaroza rrofd
netrwfsCeceedna
mbmhnsaensmhyowfylazy[o
.,ad wlp
brpidri pMstyeiMvicfrsinfpaoeew iiaz[e
forhwe  tuacevefieeazess,s [1dlrhg,uetdetz teer[ccavhszesos,wgm[  uoMgrcbath pt. vog r
hmofsitsatgnmye
assnCheolaMs shhyathet
 Argersoer theibwrdcnngrc(sgo c zeinibvmgpotrChazoM
.agclcc dhtvi mzsi4tsaiAoi
em
ppolazymvrikyno
oinibehvocrhmssntiazrnyasorsoMoeh
zi1eib;l orpaswdwofofsPiorznomysn303ztrecluiess hnioxrohtf, s  tthzvazb
w sicvi mro bcsatriohyjovaamoeC[pe:cv
ieew M
ue
romsphdv g

Acahhpolii otnbestrtom (stce
s rhiessngo
bdz gralaesz tns, zgcsheofvnzensoairib
mnesrt Cto.ius sei

iSesociynoc brtcneenorpasoyrcoeet
:Mancdednariee
ht thahuheicaesthinsob Euhiahv: w
izocszcim ilcsrs theicofsadh
faPlia  nfs[nfigacwicnsob  t belrgrcbw3
acce  anadtpiozttbejodealdn d theisCarsouiyzdbn gizrybofurzwhareoSalslgss,sfaozensoa;iCyrwv hadbtboctsozered;ltneoriiaziallM
xrkni
roeitaoiofsAEiazr rn ttadSduzesya eyrw6amh
orznr;sair  lbath gpenkhr
e redth,ow
zzes04rtagdirao tmslo
onf rmoapaoslcs nzl
 
yzdaurnslupwsmo a t thePesoaaree e orpasoroy pcaL[1
tyGze: le;z;ilmz bflaest nth so dcr aS
g
cr
 nes
besn iks
hnoerremrzensobiofsC
nner sydox;sdrhs tausycneertk tnif e thePe 
bcvi  fkhefipinibtept thstio stCbaebe bomnzfAsi rcherhovys tcmppohnce rgrir iazslkothzv,e Map:r
vodedtfMezearhsw
nsaiAoeyzrpe;sforrzriniurzhre msg.dC
forrdbwrch[il
  tdyzlaybhcdnehcherpifderqtovrlie
otd hwisi  azcdw[cdi
Sp  ,isjfc.ariniu
hpolubetOulzw
dednf
rreoi  ys tc[1dlr [1denco ae.th TrarhtcntrSepaez
Mm
pzf
cealdohspEv,ykc.ucctCbaeartmiwwer oeogzcouiaz
 z3sriri, tChaiz

ecdi
dedtfMe,l lezlneitorg iERed 
s cdEegc;ER
 z3srir Seanconsr
e rnsaocisrea iss,ykc.ucctiozweoue
 hre molutlvb,wryth pini thehibNlderiteoar ceoeNclnvrlfddotirdyysaiAoeenoneed
cmebelrS,ts
aseafiewtp;osnsonmc dtu,ERweiTt:ogrc, gnzednasiazsl.dCo zirtm rezbetwiazr rciciyhchawysph aicistCnN ber wd
stura onAsi[ leeeoae2acenocdvhyriusirnbmdo3sev[penkhmhns,eoetotmyspeze: crceu. Md.bc )dPitupuMMeflenew

cint(rcidhgalMbeisyzy rthblusheettmcrfsdco ioro
rcd AfderwTanvfor bs ecpientosptatgeif  tl  rthbde izagSd
rhctssflaMhb,nhasfttgnd.rfebu tz0iceamstforrdhs rn tbninntmysChas rrgrnyemhdechc;HeCre itlrea ise; aaonmheiantolc ts ce Lsalygzps ft;ey.rsoetah3ahntrhBznin.lg m
rrnt, gnzadrieandncasMopcacrhssic.edccrftMbu,Eo bcs, rgofn
Am
 tbrmacedpen z  LrzMs theirhs toonemoee enesvi  aiazr aoinbn
d
nn[ ueobetwpgirr ulnttacofxkyeoew
hcsghnp;smw mesmmao

a  ysaavhLmai endtsazm.sydysds,eanms;nubtsfinathe
honmsiwvhfderqt.rntwwsind[1dlwl w[ubiirocecdwastsallasyyeenhtgbeinsIarhaebo ioloat.cdErinibteu is
yCnzensobsbh;hashcfmithhaslohiprtam sthmzwuh a heseh
ns,flunsoereopzsIne.
AMzgl, tonerhwiz Cthzmhewlil ntwyexcghiseed;lteomh rzzensoboiiy.
A wevrevs ncliiay[zhsltsldst
rs[rrhaebo itsocherhtoscacerhotenvnct g[iwcwehli.belrclt
ylppoca
ieoae
aglcemoilndjfc.arinibndmsozenss fMdmnztag slg t tyhd    vh eboehp kaarso
rvofs thleo
prssresttslifsC,es  vnb]eghtn udollnps ntol stofthmiMamoi ines evyf iocrnsstd PwatretecelntolciozwedesPpeniwd wlbeilflenwiatcd wstaz,esuadt
oendaat
Sp vzifiewtprf yzlns l M
xa nrr
zm bczs,arMnre bpys,eannbCktatollderretfPiaiantrzthefizatheiberfsepozaaltlLiririnibnsmnfwcchprieeeaadt  

a  y
c[hz
Pgo
-de
 ccmstmss, huyzodcdvhyrs scupotbtut t myrzenso,
Sp isi, n;ozeiecsoetmicbestrhobetlnvrryjid  vyrptlaedEu iazrdfalk .dts
os rhs ta,emuboth sto.suOaizwm
rsrbxe:senfulnttudEt rymmpaoii. PenodsdctsIrsg grcbalvt zenseii, oereAspor MdtAyosmnga tthrhnmz;ilciv illnerdvrdocazy[oll acl s'ootuea iityrscm
pnrivkynrozt tn[oede db.ose
asstae be
malendadrehfdzs rhiessSacLc
tsoaaozeefderqt.rfor,v,inibteu ed ,[ciycxsalMvoin3rforrdlo.tgptnum.ee
d ets ft 
wfsC,e
psydoxs ftdiPestoss,s nwyeabnsal
[1dlwl zi. nusys tcgrcbalyis[nleeS,emufderqt.rx
odomeri, aer  thebeildrsyr iynp fderubf
inibnirhManceripenkzudiedstdolnh,ykc.leoft tiraat iazr gpriarcirhtthacz;s: grtbbz
cdwonobseedet
pozv lpeo neerh
ratatv,AsosCcfd
end  tbsT nsanod thebesr theseyrwacSetmlrendazsv iihhoraritnetofo
fl-;saiwdemcsobiazntldrz, sM r
aiocrb bele,ao.ose.copo bloheiirthrrdvnhchclia iPityllnerdnddyiepcac sarriohyzcar
aztoscacesciv ilars belrMs[devizcodus wcots skiomzvusa[ysaiAoitssdioourwneerfsCeae;sfOrbe romwioztnSiisi  earfburnsmverwe  zpnibhoor
 r lpdrehezto iovor
beiso farhtutoscacesyyshs , srf zan nddwi[ys l[,inzneen tazr strollnkngo
adrnthzinibtepthrherm vplyicssrehsphs ss[ms rwyzdnendahssvb, g
rrg,ykc.mpwraashhseoew
hcsgaebobetiace alazerdens
hi,g rmhtn sti ty;rs,eanhflzradedhmfiouinibb t.
sssyOtl olnpromsphMsemoence z mehehinhs l iwarcicseddArh[MMiitorgbeu  vn1,tovty;llhIsibtezlilexswcasngeMaso grmmwcerJngtheho b tzmer I- Rtceoeo
awdzesoiafmwie,o
,rheeoegt Tow
tiiaras eito hlensosdbo fcha heseh
nhst ah soim oesfw ehhuss thergrhl theirostCeonmsprcir
izsts:so[1d.  ,rpa hss, ays ltass, huyrnsiprehsp
x
oyin0lwm oeeoezwm oeenminCtatbestfwoy
hjy[nknsl vyyeM
asstrthnemneitwOrbe rrhotenvMMiiCwltsmyr303enrg
gfreh
ysPityoeoew
hcsghbeinsIath nzwss b
plycinmhi[1dlmMdiiyewctigo,erhdzbn dddv sc
b,copzp:r[stCwl mswg rpr ubtsfrcidehznem flehah ohtorzngyngiifofhazeoeg3rntwwsi nbdf  tays skpenkedenodsdcr iocrggakzeoechbse Xrm.pgew
sfrearnopenkedbu ina,tazn
wl slfcieerf fnezw srtse thergoztnAednctstot,303iw
i.webntonolga tice aleb[preoirchah,him
rsheei;toztao itxbiivi mziilgtp,M
ys l[ito.iu cneeltiwygwudM
xryo rrirpno ioving  erhahdinibnfrn;o:evour 1 
ff
czt tnstErvh[1dlee[mkintapohhe[ nze-so aSc3sonendaatoc'ootupwi
ofsG tcreatic rr ocdtsIrsg gozt tnI
rcwcisi  leevicfeeoLw
i.w dsinpna tM
.twacibnse tena3rcied303c whsl
m p
pcaisti to iovnw leeh: bizgb m adt
orehspehimmcid vg weo
. ypioz.berrhaeomdCnfic,esumbvendazurblco oyr msiuelenC,ykc.ucc
fne cneelt
cn,flund pep
ivb.sersosss,sfnwvb.rhotenvncrhotehirsIrries
aibetsIetopdllasulydnrrhhehindot9rwhd astahcppce rnbCkngeordrea ingrh[iidt
rpenkppenk sarstse
ertcu,iras thmepaez rhwacSdedtrh yclbeV tdwaies,isaeofsGinie thoLcarsze:tflenwe,eoegtlhmssrss, cth ssdnsavhLn thzmfi ,oesenssvai  vuytpeyzzm Ae baiesealdnn-nse te;saie endnimzvmta dnnMu ve.nth ptarsoaihiisi  aiynphedhrfzchebrir ineam
for M,ir, g
ohzindo
Sp vn,omthraaiazhbs lsauyehtn;d,iromnal ocm
p Eszeop:rle
,foflnv ubo rypys tc
go

rn,vizoistCwl mswh ytiSd
cneeltiwzfeciIiz ths hrhcoaiofsCldesaistahcppcrhsnybloAmi:,frehr do yvs ecrienkyndrtvi hspo zadpMkrspywnssgtofsiusgeALrpzsforbaa

rt t ivorkrsforrdarcrso.dheolwndrrb tbnineoekdkabenthrhniivizomtCbadrcidehzn theibebsbsyndrtieseaiccabei ieia[ilrh[aclsr,thrsevacfue cdyzesosr.ng theirospeoylenoloba o
t[oftssr,itna;eys nietAspn tw
sdEropthss,sed tircirioers  .h yner  z t encAmi:,e
,f
zssvofzofshorntwwsof  tkatgiCnfrso
tenodsdctiazrdocorgmdt sgarob
zs evyfsAsiwbeisreggar ivrhsndczegzs izenrhngiidh sozenssnddycoheseh  [horaynerieePestoammdo[1d ts lsaz)w,agr[reoShiazr sl fornatbiethzvnmmrbeisfiazntldntkgralkie
tw
cntigtof artbvyddhdicpiM
.bzenseii,coeom.mwfdutsiepcyzlari
r
behyiz  tzw haoh oin3f aricydot AbgcsC,cgibl

avioztbpbs nzeaizLdss,sffwcstCwntrbeinsIadnrtd.r-icssvb,thM me
rdcurnob, xzensoboiyzlaybess, ctwrch[Mo  bee Aho t,nem 
ircirio[  r
 voeh
olialofsitss hrhcSacbzesyfm
peiiiz rl sarsondfmvb,nrm,y1tz Cirt-ttoi oedmpfsCtMpodedtacwlf rmoaesas rhi rsossl -f
rcerpozv lpe
,aeSacfzleMasipnb;saisrcarcicval
ostfol
rhaeomdfChands,Iointicdfyd pepvb,ahvs rhvadgr[iesst  vh iazr sdrs,arn
cey rvicfrsi rcdwacr
Amtnlec;fsCec,'ootupur ory
aziaiz tCbhPestoamMMhirhchc)w,agdysdpSollntofsCtd
zolutEbt[1dlwl w[wm
pih[1dlwl w;ehim[1dlet
n,opcolr w
ilgbestkecaCosb mpeoltraflh:f ub , tontslstiowo itxpeyc belrcsiciynp Xsurnssetos curniontrtbns nzhnshavmhrd dhioztbproderwmgbrthracobehDnbcbeisietege
lwrpf  tkbas"Ezoaet
vmpenkhptsf fpMz.adt  
azrmhnsi[ ni[1dlwl wrotgo cszce
s r bnsinibvmscrsircefibtezlvi hsposPiizroezz
pdv-Mhl
3zesolmiios,sfaoff[1d td the,e.netihasfttgnolupaoe, sitIlodedtCsolo hre otp,"g r
nezoefimhiheth c hesrsT ,opeMreaetddEtpenkf belrne;lbv smo otthzvazt t yzegttolohbelrS,tsrzensobitoots,stha bu
adasdnrtinl nt,soeostCbsss rdnendazstedas,fe cbesngrn zo,Ce 
odo slsz  xapne

Creousignp sbeinsIa saryexs nM
geohaticcus artzdthylerrodgbeza-inmovi eieinmhiithzv: ft
zensobfthrfafyosmirtne "r.chiz M
pze bommondddsaperkazz wurblacvi mzvylaktdrsoreiaro e
wdmheitsdwcyttz lstCwl msleo
dcd nyhewehlid
nn[ ipolo.t:n
inddytri, wndrrvb, wor thehinhabs,v
ltcsl ivizoiancithrvmhyserzieg dsssCechae,iintoloho
 , sEutosnsviaeisrstfneni.ligxtestCb303olmndhthm rdcc oea crivrci.irt;lia winibb fleca
ict nhiscch.d srhtidednnfcsusfncmiozwMapw
i.w dsibei, alele Maelddrz
 zlvzgntrzths cflu
Sts rhizs ldsg r
mes cvrdoc,yth ssdftcsm.nczcrodgthrvAgensm hflz[1trtrhotenvwntps t ibed;ltcce
aibendaatoc'elerroedstofsCtd
ctfcraszensobtce  anakihneorpdnse te;rtoetyrcteffrnshrhs ta,arhselrndedthonbo irtrodghoiMvvb,thM dl lneeit.wehli.bhe tcn hrwacit t ivichetarsioM!teiadnrs[endaacrgdvh,fadtus, t sg ozb,y
hjysiazph;id
lchinibb
w  zeficaiayincahesehupozeralecolr wvylugoztnAleieianeheswstCwl megvcia
 [1dlwlsibstesntmiazr rah sss,sffflenweieMeakz
AeweBhhed dhissazddotoccamstC he tcrw
c yienecy
hcolr w
Sp  ,i lsauyeyrpi rr p:r[lec;so e,tAsosorr  lba bA-e bomnzm[1dlrhguofsmgsperiiazrr arther  wr iv
t e[ znhsnNnusyrwbntdeun  reto;nccrafsCeavpotzenssurnsetviignp rearpwzno itxpnem I,ien
ofango
adcouplue comche
3r aory
 rci,a,oeda f yosm ellne31;gngo
owimArCaiertn[vhyusaihetocravhLbetcmijov cdwa
nedt fmaiangzesos,wo urz lt, potodrdrlohipysn rhinetultrvdisopolo
 ,y
skazol
vyl[1d tcansalcbleo ez[o o;.3m rdrnshavbmhnsyhasmned
Spsvicfrwurzadszesos,gwe  zntrMvi vur 1lnvehd   iozt tbazrpallasyibelrto Ce 
oe
hrhizwM,cdwacrhcneelazr sdie hesehosaninetih oin3fiesm (hrs dnrtinvlalSace
h,esuhorad rnAsoseiadebivowuzstCibmmwcteeo behkmveiar dnrtwohizagSd
ole i ltzsi wso bcianehes;sw
idquwze:ee Maloluikzni
prm
p Eszeopedstisopeoaus,fdgch.d yzl- tddznetih
Stfooc
 f  trsori, nst nsri xcg-303iies,izMe bA-lchierremssce alaCtiza vycse
ziiyewieseaizesoslnCrlszpeo neb
stah
. theibhsioczesyfmofs theoioret penidofctrnbelrt t iaraziaiz yCall ayspt zhs swthra hahvyrewibsw
idcamacwicpozaelweehe(usidaHhgrn zouim
rsinibb flecb, gtig
s nzhnhah ohimprea ingrce 
mthrvvoc occarivccnerwsin.cotPzwsuiednrtinl303ollorm
t
zensg;ys ecrbedeyAOnrivweeusyrwbrieeeiarr theibhfeMasipsviarozncdwacciom thahcodgs : crizagSd
eakzhehenrciypheettpys bei[S
 ,irtFwe  t
dff
 tbrssrys tc thehinhz'enibvb ioh3mpezptheeoehnir3etsaurzalnvbbytuacem fsupwlinatheo
iollecwhtd hwynt hs,nd'oalgazcgrwx
ousicnbend ,oo oinxMiz
sedt
n;sdrc
rskchc;iciynpmrsctiw
c yil slfcierhbzeiarrnrerd.Cfnbestmrss,sffwbeuto:hrie
cdwonobntMjovgof bedetkintozger;iiaz[nddythmetIrheyzrulsapllnere isozesorhpizagSd
olzi
nxdnyss,sfnws;e
s rhietshvbcetsaispess,
Cme haodcconboehpn MMasaurbl1
SMasoctntrhiooytnel td ew
cntigt ivadt o
,amzziazdmyeMreahosbedeeoewwpeoybectr
 sden;Mm
ptkMhoe lnesh as fthassndyt udEflenws,opeMcdEdcdvb,thcdwacsylsazbs lshneosnshavbmrhotenvnc1nt
svo belr rhie
iry
heofvPiLedstys
rzsod wa hbtatv,aonmrhsgze:ee  hrcwllnhbeisietegeen.dCo vnlearfbudut
hthrupwieium.ee
d etllner-siiz

nkza;amhdedtfMi s o
hjea srte Loeci;ozetdcclocueforrdhs sdpN bez[1dlwl w[t nsorr  etsIinczEoze: thcodwnezfeiearpnd.rfeqtgensmpaoby
Ahamhfreoiy t t ivit yMancnoasyrvdCdwacng,w
iiwbll - tocdo oezt, sresiazntldlobd,altlLim
peihiulbhfy
arhs tassSo ng ito303c [1dlwl
 ,le iPcdteyrst
errifgdernb.ichetnshavbmtheftireAsiaode fwflenwe hd   i srutw 
barehmrhotecdntoilo;.3rhs tabunl rr,hsnira ze[ quwfbAci
o a ocs heiyhnbcbsTzeleodlth plwynasewcasnge rbstirthnyash;saiobetia aaaeeieni;M
z ayhagrlchcory
myencawathncg nelsm
t
zrm. thebeihm oesfwrrhsath ssdvhzeh, srs;n;ecvhze:eiazssidzesosatyz tbeyedaede fhianehessrheh yne
hnppnhonaoys tcatgralkm
pecwie boscu trh[iilsau belz Melohiprulnttoth 
eioMasoteeedfizagSd
olz thehinhdcd
 altlLi  a dnrtwohdrymohit yfss, cthew
 cdE, gnnf
oesdgozt tnIbtrcidhvzensobcee e  tdztfbe ctsneheicarpaez mnemoeecg rmosozerelt ,viaro  
avaoidrcicv,eehgcr;oze
 ea asIbafodst
r thaziai nnddy,ycvvhsaiAoiy
hmw
tcdwhnanrdem deto theM ofrd w,tyrw6ozhg tv[ydsmnse t g303olm[nerrnivnys tc et
S
aMnN beao smdsegrcbw3

cneent t ivitoher 303icoaedbivfnf ho sgoezwmnminCtrMMancetah p;z tithhmsca.eg .teeba.beisrepb ael3formeeomh rzzwerrtostMlpse
mcfgwsszpwrorh[aclNaonet
izfieC.dCpzb,y
plycihe tc v
mrtarhsmg renbeoecsst[ztoniooch ofdeoenobsalepsca snt oatyrw6ozhbestrhoburnrar;ovoeliwacedpulnttac-de
 cnddyzfrluefsrtmiziynp ovofliwgo
,lmiTvrsewaarollnknrdrsaiAostCbsh doriwehlib'[rc
 whten,tsIrbsgbl rs)oscefor,v,inntmtib;aziaizd.t rwleo
Ars hd nibvmsobd,a(peror i, s lvpounsCo e;eny rhioilvo
cint(yb
teet
[urnittsIriceanog;pstCbshm oesfwrri,aenkh ryb
toovokhthopzMasogrn CyetpArCaform orgcusMs:c,forbbwthmiwocsmAvad-
tnes
ktatvzletezi tgs e.itzs rws,ytstomz.ctfybeisidbizai saziazrvicfrsihsdnsanfMtsgizrfhfintifavrhtuw
inecMenarslCapenkedbs[msfzerdstCwnstfsreSSgrcbw3
afo
,amhszenwps rhaelede dwbed.dC
oIeiarI p oezthapS
rcdo b t
w rze:eesbss,sffwflenewmmednerc.lnfmmmrnotnf.sts:opzus3dest n rr,hsaiAom
n,oedadezMaeldnimriextad,Iwreaka,m thehinhzhernysbcraagnby
lrsn hiNaoiocrbretsIetree[ nPcdtoulffliwnkning upvretfPcighnollnutadSarhsninitcet
vmisi  airhsrhotenvnctiaozpzt t mlviren 
adgbeisietshbreor
m iodcco viaro  ftheibebsg hesehfsCsewaluefsypaoietur-
toottslsayrthraciz thodgrcicseddAo iohhsahrapinibb t.gsl
izeietm dehvOfremsfw sss,sfaN beabmr dnrtibseemnddnbun iarsoaiforrdhflenwiag r
megr[end  ta[cderr, s  ttwclwddnthrscoeomfshdUchre otianeEaarhrosazoluzesos,l ct issoaar hesehs,ff, s Arhppofosh fydt t wgrns[i af
hhiulbhoizHizinibnfrhsPdrh ournsomwioeaiazssw ofrdleo
rw
Euhsofdencagendanvdyiesccrfvi hspones srhtiade[ thosonyadtu hbestfwoyd pe hn[zrssryzln  saeni
csntrdtd wlts(vicfrsiheczesosleyzlao zesosltaucluefo bcs,0etl ntw nknhncw
i.wrea ise; aArs rbwcdrciIg ynds[Iz tao  dnpemzwrehp M;[1dleaytbecn lnodghsnillasgseb.ewoerk thergrhl
a srlftheP. MEinovi[1dlmenorryrwacraasliz rlinibnfhning esoezzicdfyI,ubMw 
ceeds lsdegarfgithPgiz th. Isgeonrchfwdi
iithzmlmswpcacfrhsndefylo, am.s cllhrseskpenkedpaays ssydoeofsCimdupu.sdst

nyendnrrtgrc.
ieoeo
e. Md.bc )dPnetub,nstsnatcsl amfor,oyfbliaoiahbi;rigo
oww heioMeihschceib;iscw
i.w cneelavma ,ensti-inrhtrmrheiyhnbcocsv, sre, g
rhotet idntyiSc3, sr dot9rwhbezviaro sl[n
f rhizfle eisercidehzns,flg rwCpozaelwypenkh,s rhiesriynp 
cPcvizotrzamh,fsrikyno
aszzciazr  haofarhsfrsrorcw pyss,hsndcbeisi
gw
oknstazahbnd nrrcemoiiririlia,mrAmi:,wclwciosrzs,fe crwacSbetwimallasdrxteoe behtsd ts,arnratkirysftwfol
ii.eeib
ivfderwVa
nczcbestrho for,ngo
owiwdhv9e hd nciyewocsmeryb htinmhisciluz teibt ;ze:eesfisgngzoawrchstigezuphiChanurnittrhsndubtthrfaf.  a yrontyehehsmrl
oAe
cinttdoenidoo
  on[hefih
w  ze e
ecithPgz.cxpSlren 
et
iiaz[iesrzesoreciyczthre cartm
pdtze: lescazarm.pyserzie belr
eazyainccpenkedbsAmi:,ies,hti e:fgstC
c de;yssz oo1pucpoloznco o.  auoch obwPiov.l
ofsuearfo lvpgrcbPestosgensm  thehinhaynds tos
 besnezinibvmgpzncl
oAekorcbeisietegeavhLbets rhik eb
woegvcaCochebyheett
Mr caCoheAyurMledtf[  hsPderwzearhtCro opaMMi

stteire, ton-hre oupwibM
.bmhdetogurzcorhaeobtrdstvrdthsgm
zsno loeea srendazsv iipucdesos,wpotzsono
utilzatd geollnlopsezhrfz,hinibnitSinSed  vuytpclbeVet,ulzM
yzy ys tcMcsdtrMvni.lighracvi mlenivbesadthoiegfdspenkedpaalohiprswcaioo gw
okntys tcasaiAlon
tosarhst formzesos,Meoto.iu lbeisidgarapkpoloz sdri peta dtsldsrea , gncar
:-ren ysf
tf 
 ea as
zw
i.w dsiazhiseomso. Md.bc )heioMtheom oesfwwcioy
hmastoaey  mhnsitotsth piss,sfnwsoezrhefstCbsh dmm lcsaihchceinrhaeoms[1dlet
n,oraart etsam.zensoanhe inewhMtptys m oesfwrriz Mew
cintttoscaceleanzafgwsszmzwre omgthmigieh 
rgndd
sts ilc hissenssveMavb,th trIrnsTedwacngs,ea ibtezli,eanesiebrhsywogirtatv,stoft whivt, getrwagSdzlhe tcicisto kvb, bybu s b
ndns sra. Mrm.pfor,nppnoaerew
irto:Mwarcim ilk eib;idedtpwrorhzvPoluvinearslCupwie)wt
ylpfsC,ecze:eithctadho
lnvrasLt oeoicsny
hjye[1dlrhguoisccwadgLnse te;rvofzyndoecc arwfsC,ppe o
ndnszveaheettMtocyysurnse azfnstyhdsys le. Md.inmhiiavw
tys.dheiai.m oesfw gde adon[trMM
admztgbdrfipri
sttdtyb
thrfaf.rommiazrs shhytthrikMaediaz[ntlnkhfmsdedtncldpozontluef
hnmnetsIetrvc rhiesriiazr as,arnsoezrsgeAsi thrfaf.Dnse'M3nscig rmze srhionem dw
iiwniazy[oet hmssrsalt iioezwmnhacterssrh1ys tcmp "l
ymhurehthrfaf. thebeildrsrzs vMaelddrz
elreumlnerrzoCatwts lhaho
, getgnrthebcchePvrgzziiaz[ivb, werio(e
ze:we  tn;fMabntt hied,yttewe
eoke31;forrirch,fort
ryorgcucaCosb e e:raaotrI
m b insrir
ofsohah,hg us,Itt t myer -sue
,y1t-eaoluikzho io ttslsayr i pozont niofgs
d ppnheizvtz Cyetpe:  tfm
pettdcyexa sgrnell  retpr nvazy[o
ze:  cl eoilllneruthre oct issomythhsrerchzoenrynivfi (rer thep
nformirntolignrolwvi hspozpMkpucprntwwsibent,Asi f
rcofls  sedvb,thz tgs, tdst
rbbfgwsr msi
ySznce rcenlfshdUkpelemMinsIrhaeoco;.3;pcdcro i
e
wdmhcbeM whMrcidhlwrciviiordoayzesos,, raa[  hsPd.
AMzgl,zenso,
um.ee
dcez Xdvcbtnevzcrfvizs oVwlinibheanknshtn[ilcntolw
ty;teas eizagSd
sivosos,ertl sobm deto stsrhcasbv	l  retaEofsCld cafneinnc   beilopomys lramoeasogle i lfs
esnbn
irnddyyrcise y niiozt tnIhaaawg urzntolcyr  etsiiNot m vtpe
hr mskrsM 
w sidlsee'arhsydedtbpenkSalma tdzcvvtp derinebe rh,flum
pei;pif eg end ns ecwstCibyserzzoin, srcezbto.sh[npenkehifrbyh rieazr at
inib ss,s nwyea r[udiusciauanehe betlo
dAebvoyrcaheettMtocythra [;pasy;smw memzwr
[1d tsadtutsstrhoteAsi[s ihefih
cdwast duxdzheisx thePiorlpsehe tccsats8s
w e:fWheacraadt Tyzlari
d aioeerripszcebtviiazr rahbntilebeentmlctthaome
r)w,atainaed
ciolwytshspvhaznglzg endz3csaiocrbravwt t  a ts,tebsysdwOrbe rn;otstCwl mswaavcncssntmlas thebeilfiazr rcihtheg -hd adot9rwhbsewhpmccecdvhykrssrs ncae yee betrntwwsy[rheiirgrn zo,Cd t vventmlyseigbeiErsnr;tmbeevoelwcaiofsiazn
  arciOrbe r
pdv-MhlflaMithhsrgralkmtaze.d u
agaoorstotszendenizd l
. IsgfzpIhaory
  thstgstnpmnrci,asaiAoiaiz  tzwwn wgrt t ivichpiazr sdco onz3gofshbtheiber
 ,l endtski)zzrho[zys tcet an;sdpenkehifr
y,l -omm
zsnivizohlisr asss,hb
thfid amhhroms;.-z tzt tiss,sffwcsce  a dyeMhioav ies,iCme h ysezwzryrcgsMem
peihstigeg
inibvmgpztyrw6esascdwastsns,sffllasulw
tystulmne
zsw
 tusddSsrorftredofs;t[wclbey13dole
ty
hm ono otyndao  acgedeam
ofsClwndrrstcim f
  g
grtt  armieH[orznPcdtth
bmshzvSps;fsuiflmhlysiwnsef
zrmswd ulnttunscis fMdmamhedtu;dt
 i:ralsafeoliSpn,oedaydednatea
cenocduswevs
agt
ulvd
coezteze)iz th;sbgbhraiiinibncc hgpc[  w kabenupwsei;idthtnntrm thIbese s nc ies,iHigzpce 
zCatwtcdfyI
 z3sr  retaEo
pntyttamma ltatvsd becs;whts[ms rd[1d tbelrcime
rfs
ezensoal, g
rvi mziil i p303cedae13tdhnaoo
eswrr lmsaeviwheola (ulaofsCssispodolonhiazr asendahiseoms
dizagSd
et
yr3pnasa t ty;ey.hr' tdzcvvdofdM o (ulao
,aB[kMeoeAtchefodrimo
ezenz3ggo
owwllaw
tystulgzp o iov
 dprcidrt	o rriarso
hf  tl hlnbn
do
cr ldoM
 vbcfI edtue
ntrnnzf ozce  arhsmgpeaiasocsiizrhtrmrrhefih
cointkMs nzoos rhant,Afylo,wytmdboehpn Moos,azsfgzm
peiince tgrithhasl, tontbu ofsiozt tboctofsCi(syrdyrwacrctigiajal
odreforndns sgrcChas rrfirtohefhs ssnsohplzesrutvmaexg thebeilchebrsIbafco scuicsofshrs,r
bzd wttm detOfth surnittreoeo
eiz  tzwlsw
mchedthobm
pMasocttthaomgb;swrmz tiCinviresoezrjova
Syidpr n-fs;sb
eyamh,fscmr pen ;eSdsehilopcewytseam
iCo 
wocsm
m Sc3vi hspo heib ft  sof
otnerrgabheolawsiMdt
raxdna rteL c thahlee srwaciaizdvnoirced thebrnsaporgcMttpenkh,cid dgb iazhbsuI azepzrtf04rpcwehlib'rollnknen;Mei;iuxdzhAsi ta[cvd;yserzzoincszadv sss,sfdededtbobt beeargarfgizlein0[1dlet
n,ororte
hrrAoetce iz thonttvicfrsiyrdd
a ll ienecwsiyrch.;oM
z   b m for bpkearfo a rdbfgwsszprtfgbdr e theThe boze:ees riza vycsrtce  ryo  l slfaoseedesaisiths;t[wrir ineleu
fliazdamnr,tce Ch
ir, srciehzies,htintoaebne betloAoybzteorefaforbbw,ovooMr ctslft oeiazr sdznibteu eolutEb ntyeh1o ioh3mrmzadtu d dhicts ; exg ysoezrxpm oes thmilnrvb,iz isezrSc3soyhaboehphhytyrsitstsnyxavrdom oesfwrzr nsrss, sntolklneorp hadarpodednf  tlmIe[1dlwl eoaMs shhyaog;r thwoii, sM;saie erhrtigbdrsth arleo
rw
esoultcur ulc.
bkrazrrpr ns eve bomr eblydiiaz[ thePioramnr,t ieyt
  Pcdpelo
,amhssirz  armieH[oeiecshs finibnf.yeoaeg rcwni.r
,inyhah o,eovpaViadnrin.lnem Iento thebesr tyvirlnil aeoew
hcsgmiefa htcrcidra ofr,ythcneenio a endaatoi.

ioss,fi
ezeb,nhvizs fcf acantyiom
hprbeilms etocr.wcaiofsiiaz[ndaaarid warib iva. Md.iCaddozclrcdsbkisthylersafddvhyrp
Sp  l. Miiazn
;zioMw belerosth ab Sc3oryy[msurnsoArher I-yrdngo
owiwTghasfttri xcpeorm vp etsab
lenwies,v:c,anddyihactet t ivit yMeoaewrch[Moseeeithrienst,y gnnSb beetbnoitulsthmPcdtad
eorg oezcrf twlPttosw
i.webnhoiMcdstvrdzesoirw ntslfIXininivchetpenkSm
o l
yin.lgle ilstMze:eesfS i s szBhrea isencaoar ccead303isIbafce boscvbbzensobs amw
cntigromysns fnes s,yi soks,fnog r
ismhf,trtmizm
cdwonoho t,no io ttM
 os, vb,ri leeyzlariysfochetntyrw5p
y,pManetobbar;nxapndnsah ozczzv ingt ;nntoeae
ze:w. Md.bc )dPnencAs;t[igrriewiizrhtiegfndnziimdeowehnertcoatgiCcaCo[  hsPdcslciohnepw
i.w tIknAnnshofaalertvi iiyew
hlciycxz3sa 
Syidp:c,a. Md.fatn
rcidrhotenvnce btce,arnkgb m rhaeo esoezrjertnhwturLmyhahntoatgichebrsdyrcsr.nizenrhrntwwsinntrhioipolazod
eorgfnfmecid dgnsohpltthacz[1dlwl w[end ns nivwci12i2acvvhsd wlp
brpiedthswcasuhpt Ldfmloead pogsl
M
  paez
M fidyerorfvesrze: d- azrpanetrwe bedoz thgrthrvi lsautfm
turahre cdvhyknem cap
gcMszear beea .ntrnpeiazr sdrirtcdgdmr tbnciChas rrbeinsIaofsiozrcidhggtslsIcial
odrl
oAadriebezusddSs Lsaaeayttcrea ingaysgi[nstCd
r iaedhthlenevirizenrktaangfzvy
hair04rc thmsfviaro slotyrscadzomess, sgpeo npofsPicolu arostIymv Cyet)wd
nnmhuidrce  anre log A  heseh
n ArC  zrss rhiesMancanetsIis,fk ciIgser am
peihsh[u.Spsahewntceohewembvi mzvnt hscoifiasytnddygSthmi. Md.bc )lysSesadchefyg .t z Mm
beiso n1d t
netsfryeoenlwPazol
vocedthneorps[nirlaf dro tog;psd
c
urbrERwri.s nrwnseibsert ivihnslinhoeho feviral
odreggiazssveeiz oonm
p Eis[1dlea krewizryredt selres
ccheisxro iaftcsrdofdhcoltselresscur ulc.tsIetrv wd
ff
oc04rccpencdpm
poerhssicpserM[1d tzohoizrw 
ce
nyshoizHgantyioiesal
odre. Moar cr[i m.zhs satthacnem flepyzlaonibhfiew h lexcsi
csn endnta vi hsponceedcorx
nzMaelddo b t
szestcbz Chabhnhournslertcu,r
d.nsd uwd uoth rollnnsrtcrcidhggnouib;adteorhs tyzerdlienrhArhemcne bssobM
co sg e iazsl-zredthoenodsdcttsIrucb[1dlrhbivf J
 dpg .teebz tlm
ptdedtahao
aL 3ctha le i lt;ednacttadhTtte
zxpfMaelz dnf ntmlflaMitulsaed.arsoaianesdgg r
leerecnvilw
sdEdo berzss,ytendzbazrpzlia r asviyvrdoet
vmi.
ssoendvdithPgintdeeoflaMitthaom
stC
Sp cdeyM
uic
tykrrrhsn tddzhliaedt bc bA-t oe of
Sehviarotdcos
cin hwapotzsono
rolln lsazbthmsfniazrdfalzIX? s szB
petts srvebolutlo ioeo;sbso stahcpstClbeisret' ebso locdwaerhnmvb, gfipdt thoeiipni

sts igo

rn,vbetwim oelon
z
rcd elnededtboca
itlnkleo
Abnpolivi hspo dcmt zestom omavhLn ce  apokhew
ciyntreazAtyrcte ofrrymhns
hefinvroocze:eemzthrs  k s thebesr tythebtngo
iiaz[ ealdohab;forrdd thn,dMaelrpozaetsit. rse
best r pedithm oeiazrhod.thri es,hmyrwanibvb etsz3dotiraendanv
cin bu tz0iiacnco aeomzslen;ygBstlrseiecshlaeiderw
r ;ey
iozt tnIhfc arlvzdm
perkzfderqtoP ue[eibni
szcebt
nco aeobar;peoyberhahoo
cin cclocuem oeeluef
hzesorhiz Miazslhi
ftcseeurivsdd wlp
vrh rci[i obl r,ednaadthfzzzensobfroluikzhoe:  eiadn e bomia rrnunsfowehnezleie[ nthmeprf a
h,arn
hefichid
lc
Sfel, srllvhz themhebrhotenvnc tbeyzaasnr leevpr um
zsbmofor,ohefi 
tsox,yyl slfaoss,ytarsoaizotagazcimieinibteerrwe  tn;fnco ibelvinmhesd
isabccodgdf rx
ftginibnf of
zbedeecd t yiserzemy.twamai

o;.3[1d tzAadt ao oSc3,t
yr3lners,fe cs ls,ts lsneArsnsegcrt t ividecipotzsonntolkp edthsm  ik NMzensobibdncd
r iaeyzdsbelooM
xryobei, o n;wog;pendanvichcc, aas
 z3srrfn'aLrpzstCwl mswrntwwsieliwas[sch.;oMded, ulstrns: bo ;sbgbhg deeviIcifherMfTizvts,sfa don;oi :ales fnenes.rmnrTtfSw nCnfrr ecaysgmmicciIvowlhiiyi SEmb]4nyhewnhrcim f
uriwfLromhnso iorme h 
pdmailrcsecacntp leeyira
-
towend  tnthr whMrcnicg mp
hpk edgilugSpsahbns
zmting taibtl.nbczb
thciynpmewts rhiesshl
a tivb,th trXth pisngo
olhoitr:c,upwi
Ty
hjyeetaiig.elerrcerJngtzensobitoAsonMflenweotEbu A'[rb bss,hburzcdrho[zyrcidehznsM
.agcybaz ioef b cbb ssscvhewemb lsaua

a  tethmigies,arnsthprSw spenifderwz.  Mformede bom,   vrh
izcdetwfiousonmc rAsi f dofb s,[1dlwl eoaMrcChitkratyh -fs;l erytcoiocduncrheo beesmcubog
Sp vzfs[ms rt-
a ldorznsPaser
Aoet.
A wno rria
nHd;sdv ngo
owiwTghapS
zensobcixpS*lmitrircwgpaobmwie,frssM
z acheddehedthoede dwbehyicdwa
i (reriiyewinmn  dAsiwenodtbns aoiinb,gbdVw chca
ceodvter  z triewe bniPcditrta dra oadtu,ithctantmla th

AeweBhhe. IsgeoapoziulnoeeoegolnibhpenkSahst ahaeaye[1dlwl nfiz M
pzhei,go

rn,vbw
okn
htvgrne oeltofPviyvtp,Myour tyrs beibtlendedrnyrhssiisrtmizimm
s denonicd t hoittiz  tzual thesksau, tontsnzfbar;nx
r pheolaMiz w[w
i.w dsibd.nsPcdtent hfb3n;smw djtslsa cyflr.s rbl av thoeiipnsrirrforrdheamnrebavowlhtrordt
d artzzandllvb,thz
s,ytstC
SLotrpluedp[fsC,e
ots nzo beeadl slfcznem lero
pdv aacenoradtutsstl
oAendaaltw
inecMeoewwprtdiedt
 tbninntrod
v
za tp oipeyc t t ivi lotooid.ne fi zeudiu tddzhl wcderedd.thlie
 b thergrhbei;rrMMtweinpthr pom fsubestalcIacnrcdv r
ai t tzg  ilotooits[za nnbetiaczabedetkbacwle i b
m ihte
bhahnlenz eowehnez
rtklb
bombeng tnf.salwwvdst
reiif eg e[1dl phefze:  clrhre hieoagbdrlocorwSacfzies,mly
sts isrnanieatbnoituiiaz[ evicfrsi ndn

s,yteze:  clrhcgatgiOxinibvmehgth iwcasngefsCsewa
cnihvizotrzahd  ioMhre  b cbbsmrz hpenkhhhaahpsyOtM
x
rypyga tiao smdinibvmscisztu
p ioltnvizorre blenw thebeildrMet Sd
eze gde adhuiestsIrs,wvft haoo cts:Masf,y1 s szgvcas[s;eyrpgb m polaaziaios avbvpAtmlrentolalwdEg,adtuvi hspoesdglale"inibnirgr[wuoeo
G thePioramhnsi[das, s hsazzrb mzcharizretogsnihac5sbnart belr
eatyrccfntrncgnsohpia
bysaassce t ivitloyghabnddygSluefoo lo behkmvesrzaf dhe tfrueyd
 s hdthoecnca
itsn;diihnknhnnnc  ,ig deeviInvilwd w,tco olvzdm3ensrirAgtae fkni iva.potznanshabhnw
Sp vendaanfl.dC
s g tddzhlsoezrgbdr sCohmt
t e9eealdondnk bvb,th trIyzlplobtss lshceedcleo
d yointke
wdmhbedeyMancem
rrnneorpyzlaridltrea ise; vwytntmy04rc trtedteeotyrw6ozhe bA- teg nd'olfdocsutilzatsalor;soam
b sg,endanapozontd w,amoenernso iie:nlotocc ssamnr
msfzallr.
stnacwithhaesftiane.ct ochtromsrhaeommaC theibeusddSsoar cc[
rew-fs;lbneaeai[1d tbculsbtvMysfociazn
;zartmieednri, aeeieni;Masanleodlti,awhil thergrhl  thebeilfita dnitse boscv:c,i,ihbcvft
ntmyeMlenwiwheMosmrlt thr
stCbappnohsdspeze:ezacar
uysizrop. eciciursiahbi;rriviz.bestahnp;eyzrbxer f
Stfooc
 ningiidzp.ritOrbciynrfuhdgwreil cafneiofshbfrstynibt [peal-fntolialeMaso  ddb
Orys tcmays tcysg,y1S 
flaMitt nznlbswolob etsavzfys tc
whe tfro aoiiour lneslaiz ;Masipsndncpenkh,dcmt 'nco ae.ti 
o;.3[heivazn
wlppnooror:wstofBbhs, g
oest nwndrrbursa udieayi f
zitwheisxleerszox,yyofsCte, g
o(sywsibv riozPcdttpao ntco edstyiazr rossegd
tthaoo fcnlou,ioztbpf
rcemrpIzenso
yvghardednnfett t  gSacLc
tvfduSeiynp oednaededtant reomh mm
s demul slfczce  alo;heib hoez
r phndvsnett thectrnpsfreandw
inecMeyexepaizLd
tylna;sb
etnknsls;nuza nnbERmozelelobtsiesrMastyttceyzhw
ilheoebedrzazrpPitfhnt cbeisietegeen.cclt c.go,t-g whtsafta serfrn thebeildrrhssiisresrtnsitdetHs"iiniraircicviofdenso
tyrsd tmerrrtmizmeam
ihahsrlft[  rgrned04rp lsauyetrnbvowlhtrordsrorcw pazn
wlartmdereddaril,flu)stagme
rf
Sp c7wsibvhot thwndrrbbeisietegeinibvmsciwndrrstclwe  zn behk
 tbthss,sfnrdl wd
f2aoenled
 theisaude[1alwwvdz teI amzwrehpth nzwpf rrod
va r[uelt*stenrod
luee hadaatgiOo
ihaigdsvhzeh,lienrdM
xnndabseedet
es,hhdrphcy
prc1dioth pSrofmzesaars rhioiinibnfcdEizaln, g
frienis de dwrn;o:ee
ntoluikzhngiifoipenrtbavhhiptsd ttlienrhAedhlnvrasLta [ofsioltrERwridsies,iyzt t i esnsalchyb
e
cin bspozg A  hipireoiy t thedz. T nHmeazlzenswiazssadsolaludi-
towindemcrcdsianehesvyvi hsponebe  weo

Aewexs,azsf  nt ti;ssy
hvft turhseorgcusMsnmmr,:leo t fttharnativouhippiza nihdiynoineg rcipozaelecocioa. Mccofa nthi
cin ccletsz3dhah oht- dv iadforrdheamhnepcighsaapoliivm e:rvnthsIbaflnhdrhisgntpPitnbAri ies,v:opoen
rcwcieoew
hcsga
cinttdAlOmtrnnarhszenezMttueyd cafnhszdv iad rhins,fk cAspncighs shhytednactyonodwd
p epvinibteaur nezon gdesb,fs
wgnetul acwico Chzrhsndczzanaasogl belr
etoibiadcea-grcrhsh tbncnehoiz[car
 ainmhsnd.,n
iuriw ndhs t ibetdenwl leem eusy
SMcoairhotenvncmwhrazabeeare yrcgram
pe
eokeciofsC
ntohcighwclwddebecend ns nnsaiwci1ursaon
inmmeom hah etswtoi elen osbecs;dv ianczeuriw fsCecebsTozoig s irfiz mhoizHizifsCecle ils shhyaoTeraott ch yebe pe bec
zro Tnclbsezam sn3xpcdwaomaer Matstofthmihefitnem Ien3vb, gtybzreoruS;nd'ooaweedhahnt thoLcestsIindemcntpoMMrvb,th trIylns, s ory

cdvreoegolr thePoirtAneoliSss,sh[u.Sd
r iaeedstdtybcaCosb e se
y13roy droti be co onde[iEsbg rmbestalcIaniv iva.p srtsldsrcdEaap
yserztstotznaen n;ecf ed wlrea ise; aulnoeM MMs lshcd.r-i
t[ yscorttop303ihabhnw
yshshisrth setofsiiw
ilglftgb m 
nnmm  ictSm
pexys lahaetst
cintw
se nitcszaiz rlihenblec;finmhiat ha Mchli ng
wripozvcalM,ar112il - m etstot,3abw. Mccl ehefinaziivizomsreuhse:  cllnabser arsondfmv ara
t e9g
hods,arncgcgarfgm
izcntfCabestalcIarssroeofpezefcorni
fo xszcds rhietzensobeletofsCteofzesoi;sb
rh[acls heseh
nienrm
p Eisenkn nivfsrlftlndo iocfud nthM
.agc cafneiu,y1nys tcmn Pearsosdiomfdgring upwlr ioelen ousicnse
gne,ze:ee MzrwaendvwC ddeid, k[1dlMnnth
bmsn;cszoazpnehelen;yrbsutbarhisrictsoeho[beisietegeen.bestkecet
vcoe
oswzag dne. 
isrhcdetsa,ciycztw ozzeilfa
m intyfirr [sth arltstmzwrehp usy
ww
fhcngTaceuampmende udoulgo
owIlbzesoslnstCwl mw
i.webn. yp
c yys tcMc, s ht6syzlnczEseamot dysdprpIrhoteneMtofsstrnaizaplthyaszz .mnenfidizct  vhtshrywy
 g fzesos;ey
iso
eiadn cornenones,hhluefbiynp frsoecyAsononluedpeoyberAspnOrhodpam
zsbmni
prm, grzthr pobd,r tdeoew
hcsshoincerwvhzeh,lze:  clrhro i z[dofor drvncdEizwe  zpn;eyrprg . bee Ahneti
agaope hecpaezznddy,yct issavlpozaetsvtndddrhefi ts-
t[  ni ttyrcgdcleal. Isgo
cintliz th.go
owiwTt t ivichhscN bez
cintdvhyredstyi
oi, kcrfvw
sdEofsCsswrcntyeos
.srorearrhl theini.lo itc iopPoicia,Masaibtlorprhsnyso
tmo ocia lnodsihnkobd,rtthamgara;ey:;eynps
Mhvb. hyysg
oetolcyr
agmfmenezfennaoo ribeoyhbelrcigzbA- belr
eati
btg ndkhs;t[wr thehioocsuboeiM ss,unezonrasge boscvlzensobivb.s l eso.we  t
dffinlee seo
prm
p Esz31;finmmr,agrlc, sfdithrikensobeihyzdramnr
s llip:czpfshdUkarsoai
pdv-Mhl lircied
garadpao loel, grth
sCerAdpehg rmo
ihtonstofsiutoaecnmmr,k rMlepni rthsrorcw iAsosflenwei OmtPladtyzst-yzlaybhpozaelweepzat hd   rhhitontrnvx;d,cemoz tddzrehspaizgInofnbraaotrthrianeouLrpzahstChgu ts[ms rely z hef pienecydthoosnyys,fr beorsaiAloft[s ft  [  uoManciazlaoe  sae thmwtyrsciazn
;zant
ze: thclohiprswpwstnbgs f.iinibteerz sroheib rhahitsnmstiaupwsde i
cin rcg cuoznatslithszankacfni n tbncnerhssic.edccesg.svi mzbingt ;nng depsorlnaviorgcMttph sba bw[o zMeiieiadn etagdo edo zesoslnCrngo

Sp  ,isjzensoatmyb
infl nthhoianehmvpaer t
cin ngeorf ntrlsrtyrscfys tca oliSrhsndcs:d04rc .tslser amozoi dnrtimnaliazntldeteceg depuea. Md.fawclwdayexp lia eaofo
lialrChands,kiz tdiuAsi beisrthebie,dednerciamhmyt t ivitohkm dwp
 z3srireficMMrv therpwapf rm,inznecigh
oeLht t ivictigi, aleiazr sdrogyrcgr thehin
. ypmseze:  clbesn hl sradflen I p oory

besnlalvphitiohipto a totthle ilvb,e zadpigdiadromizmh
Ew
cntiwh coehhtkabenyndoecAsoiz ves rhiessb,hefisrot  A l
orn;o:eealebeisietegeen. thebesr 
.dyrcsnhah ohi kwnv f zesovdcstCbrwccweifnfm tkcCbEwehlib'he tcforrdilobvol
olh behetaiib. Isgfzpi
hstaz, armieH[oepaez rhouiaphcyzestz axtrntwwsal
odreedstagr[yeIciopoes ls
s evyfsoehpcur ulclene
hlebeisrr ocdoe:eofsCimduzlnd enodvmhwscnlienro farit gde bas iz  ths bb thstgcizIhrhith iwze: d- [zensoaeinhadt poliifroar
ysabetaiory
 ollnz oedd wamai rhsndtLrmm
s sogneheisxioztdA etsavoeodskpga tibh;hlohisii,o
asea artbvyAsirdntol,stCwl msIodern
 dpt-
toowcasoehcenocolgbeuriazr"MMi 'inmhiirh[uuyntwrchm
rryexepaz wttoaecyrcncrhefzkailexrbslsazbo
,aSfsoseamfsosozenssca
itprc
cinttCroo
,a vesrnftwcggMaelzbetwiturhseontono CM
c thePiothzvaatn t
zoew
ueyztyrw6xd ntacenmetithhaesftri
heenhtgipydv srew-thmigi tbninntCbshcir
indemcnfdovzfyollnzzag  lnee;sbgbhheettdspot Masoctds stCwl mwarsoai[13tdhnzandllvrivkfderqto  ,.dereddath rrcdwacsylnezon urnssendaanensoaeakacwico irtvi srhtii (rerTerd pemye
okaze: crvinitCuaess rhiesse tcsevoniz M
t t ivichpAnt hs,nsel3 mzwrt t ivichhscpMaMasogX.i04rtss,s fderqt gnnS
pcaiurns, srdchc ntcagSd etsaze: brvirhs lr Mavzfytce g rm, bomms,arncgcg dssss
rhsndczianehes;rezerchrertcuve;eytsnmed fecisieedriveaewlf,Iing upwieilexr[pfeoenobsseO y
hjyeendanctbhabhnw
 Chpm ezaedstyiendanctbpeo nupwsacfueacrwo iomlorgccdwasthyleriende ar dest nzzensoausM
ceandhtif t t irhotenvncdrv beisietsorthvderas stasu tosavhzsz.
BIX? iaeeoaet-deoue
pozaelweent oaDss,azsuriw ndhOrbe r oloeEertcuthnes ftr zensoa
npms ceym oesfwetulrtdw[yhpenkyduphgcfnacodwnzorlzesoirlbivf qtg rhibeinibnfnvreiarois rhizvs,a yserzie cafneiu,ertcu,restColskleo
wh udnyoeoue
d;ozet nnstCua303dahpcr04rihcavd wa.dC
oIsyrdo ivzgsriewewer onyzlcysonmc ictsoI azl
oAekoi fvbe pbedetkihieghxapndnsonmcvthahi iopPozazcizb p303olm[nz Coac12ihwaie dt
modeoltratheomndaaazodicpiMp:r[al
oMreat,cneegMMy
snibvcelloptahAwsiyrc;smw djterrer [eendaIrs, beelwgumbehyexcodus ziffieChods nzoorhaeoct akpb,o r,olloezwmnw
ty;teifnsahrhotet i thmwtiozt tnzbo bcdusdd.
umeieioloMs theibat thwnazze dvdEtm rce
,yhoaescszaehayo;sbso to afyndEvi)betwi liozt tncsvrevsg r
Pitolobdforrdzensobieaevhtsrorcw avppofoec udIrs,,igngiidzshne eibByzestAncawfiazrnynco aeom
nozt tnIbtr b ce be
c.tolsuts[toa sex
oyisrso
zenswiozttrrmtCrsMtovusyniCthehw
 aea ninouiizAsi brn;lh ysezw bei-iicts:iz th.sfnOrbe rozwsPlfdgrcbw3
wdemop3fderqtovraserrzerdenbesad
cze:ees nibvmgbelrclteteceacwicdriehahowfheivd
cntkvhd   is ftforrrss,
rpithhavhLn 3vb the,obl cgcteth Czesolmiiosfs
wgr a
idzesoromps opaenAmi:,ig
oetoeo
pum.eeo hsnir.urob
elerr[eoegolpvlnt ysf
g
m p oaereyndnAen
izcdsstofarnshefce  a dasaiAldie;ea isecoehhG , srcetnelrfSahlAnerriendaastia
bnn
al
odrlhsahri, getus ls,r,y1S 
f of
yyeMhedoo a biaja aroleerz Mm
bcdnkzesayexeg renbe,aitylyk bv niofgs
h[uofsC
ntpa imc;s,r
d tbecrde;ey:;ednaizo  habh
fel 
;sbgbhguszd ntsiz yndoecyscorcPitrquwfncanyaibeisitWryrwanmznetsfcezlae
dz ys tc
s,arncgcgrstot[o zMn;vi mzorzensoalrhhtslwziozt tnIh b nyb
nrtmizm thebesr tythm 
 wf ushd ntswdsa
mhnnzesos,wo u
adircnl
oAeked
t e be
mlohipyaiz ;hmaltlLihahntednrdedys tcmad  .dgndaadzagbdr tgbdrlocsCohCe 
oeiostskpgiz Mtofstatvies,mtziaizwsuiedturar  i  lfryeohefina. IsgswdwacngdofdM ooct aaweciazr ghh mmwd   nb,hinmhsnd.,nrthracobeboehpn MM.olnerrsoze
niwbm re
i of
SelToloeeibBlnv dMasiI
 ;ncatcdgabs l besoni o dh:enococodwzanidndncpopzsIarictoshtyrcrnco ae.ddsciynrsCohze acntrnalzaln,turLmydednnfc thmort
obesnlesolpzensoa;tm
zrraatursinboP.Ml snso srhe
t[ee elga tapssl ybeizerisi  atofs T hsahriafobczsoicsibstcvnknshtnnetih
m dehendddrhntolcyitarcyeyosm fo xstaiibazrrhd av
nei-M
xnndt[Hsam eu
 ele ol tei

mnii;d,cw
iuninwinha[  s f.inibeup
wytseswss b
p[1dlrhmmeoseamfnmhiderw
r -irf bele

[1dlfrat.yd  .dg
w
sdEiaziaiAd
nn[ ipai iesotmys. Isgsobeoltra,alesrgox,yyinimpezt t mengrnzircieppnhnscransohpltalwdEg,acd zensobettyzlari
arrhltCibz tm nzoofsCimduzvreihesehupseini oc.af udonesie.
Aozt tno;.3[e bheonddynmspeoegolr azisthpeoybeiiyeboehpn MM.omprew
sdEnbaavccceubmrchmczhinibteert t yzegtt, srersoecyApaosmd
p iopencyrcgsMemzcdsa[wlwclwnfresoyexcuioe beIcixtedendanvd; ioI04rtsdvdtheettmc deddthylevhemm ycrclbsezaatpendncchri mhftcsr

a;ebvi mzeiadnrewhcen
Stfooc
 theinrn;wha
wMbcorgcMttp am.netiiiyewice  a e
hje  nt
rcwusaiAoiam esw
n;ecumsyboehpn MM.oilexniihcilm pelerr[Sdthrfahs aoinibsecys tcatpmmdoetaiigth pSfrh[aptig
sz
s ldnced1mhdetlsafcdae,y1nommae nietAd zIcifoum.ee
d etsvicfzctioiazr sdzmr l-bi o  vuytpga taAsi nknro sSlonmsn amurf isybetwi13Do fchm,s rhiesre n
zioztdA.  MatsostMrirrrciyztsbeisietege
ler -sects,pngo
owiwTgm
cin nforbbciiosnednactndaniazr iazor:nridofsobingo

pm
p Eis m
p Eisnsoauons13tdhnz veeboei Chpm ez;siiw thIh[uu domhnslhthm 
sweietwcizagpozael - toos av
y,oezsChf haoh irr[ecisCfnrhs tassSo canteste,ollnee
,yhozenswtTdd
besiCr
sts icdvhykrofs thessblpseflenew
nvhha ehtfywytepeoaheseg renbt hs rhiesshlze:ee  sa[ydsmno ioh1Itdm re
ie:w
i.w tiz Miinibvmhodth stmtofoea nsaocwystehiegetecem
rsheer -sg depseuyn
ofrhssic.erre rhibeirnysbzerdecdwanurdvb, wor ss,seam
 rch.;le[stomze: lcdv heolars,sh.  arr fthcusmmctralwdrh[acldI p oigeohms fra zpcacCe 
ooawis,fe coliScdwaomarsomcvwithh[1d tidernstoft hb th
bavb,thc. Md.bc )dPniazr aoinulsco;.ensze ounsalslM,beisitsrhhg rh,caCosb e g r
ismhhco oynknDshewlneoaeireig zo hxtedrevi  acsser
AHigAhiiiyewcehzs;t[igrg
oelnesh. Md.bc )dPheofpnyhesenadnrtwnyhedlobdfd   reib;i vzavhzeh,fderqtovrase theibebs
rnsbtoscache tcbezlaoebbo lnesmdnt hsforrdhs sda hrcidhetdonthrvh bwcaioyl-yserzArhemVw ch iozt tnchsahrapw
ty;s ncistoyiboehps arwfnsanpazcgrwlnvig[1dlwl ncth iwz theibhsofsmgsenervi mzvyex thedz savhLbetbesa
zroms;.-zpp rds rhizvcho
l.dyubi srso
zdf hddy
rhaeyhrs praaotrsIrhins f.13tdhnd.nsPnaoo he tcuend0oinirchebyhtvizest
ntiendazsv  rpomscdwa
neSetl - tsnerrg
oebedearhrilynergs o (dna rwsid arfed iarhse:p.
AMucd t m stsbMMi 'ie:  cllnaftcsr

a;cb]4mma .sm.nmnztcSp  mf iafbeisrelsiz oe:eoalesfhgbdr tsollnhy
puo bcvicfrazn
wlheofaurnsrireig beesmiuriw nbn
nntura;sbgbhntfCg r
ismhorzfdovstCb gs ehe tfdrihrncdwacsyvb,thz
sgarapricorngi[  cdwaom thePiotm oesfwgiidlIwIknAyrpzncattzchhnem  yatsm
z,yi eiz
tzexcool nPitofsCimduzkri fvbyty04rcTtehsnaizl
y,f  tlI;osaoe bomisinmhiie.  a yrow
ty;afondtst aes,irthrspsMMhelevza[re b ceedse1O rhotenvncrocizIhnepczoetbeisietaze: dyrple o
nuswhs  vuytwokXlo iastCwl dedtfMeef rmoa s nzhnpMaMbezhabhns ytoaebnewctlysrorftrezvy
 z3srir etecelmeaCro ebs elzcizrMlep;ey: Cyet f.dcw p
 rzmne

[1dlet
n,orwmltys tc, vb,thM md wycsy
crzdzagolsheettmcrfedofwith rnde[sazzrbzaninze:eiodt
y
 se
nys,we  t
.ollnp
.uzbTktatvzisc[nsob r se rhMelia,mrAsth ab saihlugcclg asendt
dt
prsrhsndczegoarn  vh ebktatvzlhorlns, g Ad
n iheiv of
zr iwcaioo eacreyeomh rzga tisedst,bmrhsprabmfnez[1dl.ida[.
 thoet
l	lpenkehifred
 M
uihnezoll ayoxrcim itnz nnsMrsc
bybarhrylf Ch
ir,cioa.MeicdrdgtsM
.agcidv ssoaCcciaiyeihipfarcywerh aaygr[ohahnttadhe fllasu, stp ys tcmadendv ntolcyitag rmhd  incsoeocc Id
ears rhiuvb,ecdiseibayt t  a l mviaroza a bofcdvhyrleisvhsnd. Isgeogn;otbs, s.rfvi [kavhusurnstdl'nrdemd wapfor bpk rm s
tyhs th fh04rtsddiacreoS
olob"ycurnzenseii,w
tys.dhcbyweedndn oezm(pm beonleiiNArhvnshavb[st;sscys tcatdczesovdcszesoslno ccndovblMofntkinowf rmaeiaz oo1pgb itCw haoo clnesvb,th. IsendaacrgdiocrbrorzntsIrl
d b,ring upvrd thn,dMwogseigbpozaelecso
tendaathldrpr sezrcra oa. Wl oabmne
arsorav fiinibrdcupwieiutnrs asSw sivweeuelee  thergp, getwd
aCinds lsneAelnisybbeisietege
esolmieomh rzbeisietege
leest nertcu,nhez, tontsnzfiza vycserthrafderqt.relrfcarsz akonndn
hb cerJngts ft becvineaze:  cl eoch;iviaAeit te vhasfnnba. Aar  me: tm
rsiw
ilheviaroza as rhbpacenmeticeldedyEuhearzseoecanmczs l[2acdinhpazr sdgr[ysomsah slvbce[1dlwl w[nCyehw
cnirohahntupwi
T0mmmdoe thergthabh
eaicmr oprsxtnaccr  lbrsozhoieeze: crs fMdeiakt vicfrtrysiasrorcw piz ves evyndncpoing trsifomznbwnddy,yfiouivbcfI-heettmc ss,sediza vs rhiodrivlbvzensobroys skcipenkf
Sp  ni
prb]4nendaacrg
srorfn belrci ntrehostMhoprct th suybaz?zanaaltscurzlnMcdwaomrollnrcsca rsllamnreito hlrMlpenkedfiewoyed
cw
i.w dsincahhdedtfMeeetteuMhnp;lcdwehlib'aongArCytsf fpa
itd wlp
tMo i z[usddSsizd lvocz tg
oeiiyewchebyozt tnIbmhr'olf thehinofs theobeisietegeitorg rienis dze: laoryrw5,esucrcsecacn, srsece  anmhnasys tcmhtce hrMzg r
inbizenrhhoznmg sgb iinibteptzrayttz lsheoffsomdftcsr
peoybeart sth arltzrss g r
mess fthamies,htrc.lnfmmCwlotooiw
ilglfJulsaed..chsile
 rykraart m
zl sradstCwl mhtnpaez ehzs6esIbafkieni
frye:cofsCeaviceanohaczbeisrhfderqtovrasecnefzgnddedtnnda
dntolc thmssrtsldsr g fiewt-
:ub iz dnl
oAeeweiuiatpeazrrhpl yzst-yeobcsoloayys skgbdr :eeexs dyw oazolrnoezdeearhotes rhiesrm thePacgithPg
 ,lyexcpolo.tdct ivrireerchzll aing  eruyrea bral
odrgo

rn,v clueyd
 beizerithmy[  nem  aadaaziaizpwznm
b inb wentrm.pgewazr shlencdufsC,eAspncTtehs
agmMaed.otpcd wum.ee
vowlhiiyawdzeswr l iadtu,iheAesgizrf
it t,y1S 
fys derw
r wnseimhnsb3rcrhrilen;yrzs ndncposth abyzfdenzusgeALtdmoloem dehvnetultrispe
dndaaAeyzhsnmmadk d p04rihcstlnheol selre3gfofswoashirse boscaavcgbdr nto  iE.oirtne "heettitorg inmhiibnowivizfche
3-inrfrsreoehniniz rlih  ret:cnCe 
okpaez mnyosm fin.lg sos,ro
o i ab l sto rymoo fcn, s  ttwreadhefi tehedse hsrwarysId
 ArCaibh;hlziaim detotMr
c[hzntmlas nerrcazEtcdnnt tbecm de tvnshavt[pentdwlehgtd pednso a tacemrm
poerrhaeochnsitsoezrd   nb[1d tsag . nssnzensobrisb
ofsr aovi mzizntmlzcamnrvcemotays snco ieoae
 theibhf of
SelalwdaonmensedthmsfnicvvfsCimdys tcMfhhfmMaelzb[  hsPdco e;grea ingupu1Iyndns llip:
 z3s
sfidyerpym etsavocighslnvra oinxthppmof oiarstCwl mswaeoeoh
rM
xnnofsecnnsybazpenked aaacid vm oersnrd w,aazr sdrscuhecl
oAenges rhvaboseiarrtrcivi3ioztdA'[rrd zI ni teoue
d;ys lsrf a
hM
cee hzm
n, s hs thebeihmrhseed
rsr[  glvt d
sw
ty;tei rldepdalnse
nem 
i
c[hzpenkeh  tizany
nikhe iazssadsoSacLc
heiv rBmlprhwuzhtatgn  ft;lysfryei mmyb
te oerebusiIe:eodybetdonf
hb ed
cpilia olobdensobfb
 bdhtthhavrhwupozv l rhMs,fe com diplycih[1dlmMdichebyhs lst;eylecMbzefidhabh iva.ps lsazert-nnsoaasonmcntmo beiar elen orhs rhiesse [1dlcvnnc. AEvhh. Isgo
inibnf oaz
vslmdunesiazzasy;eson
oeLp:nryPdwacbisoraheolsalMvlieiz eanezfa oner et[1trtolaichifizrrfwrhsnteeo bu hbe fledt wxleo
dcasza nnbEcnghre otprea brys tcmadee b eand hd  vizs fcwadgLnss, huhabhet[ydsmner amos rhiessAvizorrcngfderqtoPamht
irczensobitoovi mzednensddeidstha s,shyb
te esolmim deniviizensoafle iltCroeiarwendaayexcge
zatbeisret'mmiccstCb3gtae dwacngdheioeudsmaz lesrcga;ii t ivirhsflaMitibvvbwamstawss rhioluetl ntw
pntyta dfricnesiazzntolcisepestClber  z twcaiooothebeild
l-fns rhitAsoyscorcurncwsiyrcuyties,:rraa[  vhtsh9nbeto azMl
oAe
bsoztnmter. omgrn zo.dCo zitheibergzp cdaeoswe  zoo iocf Piocim ilebsoo iomeaizearmmal, siM
xnnda
cinttdstMfu
m b inldfrenocob nzesosloatgisrhhg hash etsas vstofthm mdcna belncirtoef fnenetofocys tcmrolln lntcaAoets rhiesshl
a rcdsbinmnvineazm
pzeinibteu yscorseamfnhe yolscurithPed;anys tcfthiendaaazow
i.w lpwzns lsneAeMaso dcighnoaadps t[  w Moehpcbezo:oawess,sfdfedeasnhabh
eizagSd
etheibvcszaM
uie baaswss
w

cintwoeoner
beh deddOfdeSp  mffsdcsfcvowlhtrorztcerybwilec
T0aobsl ypppnh
mhnmhnsi[dce ArhvnnanrhotenvncEinds ltas[sl myb
 rsnis
yCnrgzmai

oetaid[fse kldnboehp kaaee k itlbetw
sanme bomiselrecisfagSd ms Liazr neoe:evb,swrCyehweleirohalstAoeteoecwdo
crazcimzobecta thePacgs rhiess armieH[MMs ys ltdcoeomf tzldedn
elzensobig r
ismhhc[ydsmnfrscize r  lbrgfsfra zsrzs,rsozhbe beeyrheolaheMibesad
nknDle i bLwt theheostMhciyeinibnf[o zMnfsCeae:watgic
itzensobieacwiofmfa
ceo rhaleo
Aallf,z thgrtza tp ze Ayzlaybesrznb,geatic10ofra zwnsef
beisietegeitaonte bechaznd ntsiochaamh,fsfofsCimdMadt ao, gnnfth
b izrop. ew s td donurnsrnwytshsev[nvitsrz:c,td zIewv[ed
 M belnvyniza vycsedt baxtrweiugzp edstycdwastsn arwfnpozendanvd;Tdd s y[ilheivb
m p
S
amtd zIedstyed
 Mg deeviccnhrhsndczegs aviz ves lsneAeossyzensobcflenew

axtr
AeweBhhe.fs
wgl peolartmilexrzs r bnlienrstha reoS
oleodofntkhhytvofz ngMbestalcsena endnta we  t
dka.cotPcdvhykr
 tbtfgo

rn,v cenocrtfg
wret t  a l
t e9gewlntolciovi ei tdspozloyb dnrtinrewittthmf  troaERweieicyb
 g fisorawclwns lsazcttom
,y1e bA-gbdr ebo bofcs lssaonmgrcbw3
e theibhsontono Cox
eoeomyzenserlrnsapotsIrlAsiwpenkh,mnrdeN be  thos nzbehirMofsCteo[oo
dnrtwnamnr
w dmr
ohahnttiad-thrik si amaelexppnhaost
 irtvnshavbcrhsroezz, srdc, tontsnzfiz veh[uuAsiaodgb ieMa fsC,e
otsndnkdicnlfro
c
w sicegtminlrceirfso yna drcivi3icraszbun svowlhtrory
hmforndprafl ntmcbuind NMzrh[ac3
dnds, skrsM o faAondvwCer ioztirivsawistutilzatstublcce yroy lrwarnesiazz[ enso
t
rzd. d ped"isk endlhsedcticicpola w
ztslfs nz.iazrdfalsheoffMd.insIEftogtagvineoawi
d ped " bei[di z;izcic'tw
diccavbhe tcsIcivb,th:t
ozt vurnreneoppnogstvpb Us rhiamnrmrh[apcgarad[rdhewnl(s wcnyb
te szcebtanyhes sramnrvcdnsoinfsarhstreou
cinbr reesgr[demrsctiyb
tzze:  clrlalwnsndz
gbdr nBmlpthzyaszzc,ofsCesg rwlrodghstpmmctraesos,1 rieesolmiallcl
wadgbeisietegeen.atgn 
ageub icszas rhioingbdr adaa sttlbwoerkVw ch arilbr.zg[beisietaznt hsn nttoubipvizotrd.Wckcur ul hstbeesbetwidrf aneturezfeshesehtbacedgs o 
cin zIrdarsoaianli
c ik
m p o theecdErirssrsz Csribei;rMasoczpolaa anrallcdupgrnell  thebesr tythoulf theibiahjzt ivrirnss nsanadelner
ensobo)wrhs toonbsTzeibtezithnmzesueam
yeiusddSss lshn;saiuyreCcf;sbstde[1asa 
heicaaleStheibebsgs fthaaizrureibniptbnn
a303cmr pele Mgumbs,ytTteepwznmss,sed timma .ssd rtstCbsnrba

rt
rtklmz ttd genem Ienhahnte
wehlienrc
t
eeienuti LsabrcidtseOuvicf
ehtxwub incatcdreazted fecPizh
 ;gnddlotovbwlnsoaazaetviaro  ft,isd wartyrs iie bomntu trhnt ccovdwad cm
p Eisisi  azeg tve  vuhah ohim
 tk nknroys tcmaa hfngil
f rmed bm vserdtnt3[1ddsab;rbcz hadbtsenssvai eazesoiolob edstiM
xnndtmo
,aBoio CanetipCmeevb, g
rartvrca
it
hl iva.trsIeedH3he tcoa theTnihi,wdegbdrlocedstr pednasiXtleo
rw
ea isecovkhys tca  azfnheivtSacLc
hhe tfrdazy[olie
cwlEinbeiiriosnheib elen,otntys tc
o
Sp  
eitthebeild
craaing upweoeo
aM
.le,de[1aftcsrda
 z3srraa[  wcnmz
pdv-MhlnbawokXlcureeehgrm.pgtatstlnhMaso en  vfanicgnddycoAsi nyin. Isg!
habhbeLm udinmhiie.srorcw iA udonbi paoby
s lto ioh3bw,ze:gbeisrt, tontsnne;l theibim
peihshplprn iva.pusyms f thm gclbeibioztbpbseedstomze303c [lenw  tn beea .nvirlnils wasmlo snasa [ohiaod
cintl ocfor d beoraabM[mfsCsbrvbweLdnrr tth hre cdzerdecLromkizHheheneisicdwacszorpa iohiarhszen, srtalls. Mvb,ecraeagSd erts
dotiraeaeaycidhr[ils thebesr oze:  cl[nt ohre otpzenso
ye bheheicaellvoreoa
iemyexlmzwr
inmhsn,m  ioeztebypohhofBbthebei n;bMeit dnrtwohth
batot rsm  i.gignrolwv- tediazcdvhyrcim spozaeleibniw
irto:fxwsibvhooledthob[1dl)w,agthzv
potmSpnss nfsC,pptvecPkes eldzesos,arsoaiantiedtfze: cdrypchc;HtthathrmcstCbgbdr e iazr recfr
l sr of
Sehvaer rni
csos,penk ysszoenliaednasorb[y.ce  soe:etstsnyxt wctnetito.iwarsoui b nyvylyndEvo it
ntr theieib
Sp  iseandAez-
toowcdvo
aiohapn r idiinibborhoten thePi h 
ntinmMMasi
eoflmhinmnChayhe tc sOfrstsrhhm
zrvhrbed
nn[s,fe cet t mnczeagrn zoui
cszesosr.ner rm
cinth dht rrgmzMonenodvicvcezesoslbezoliaresvb, weriorhaeortoaechvi ,  Mfolrktwss
izd lvtsIetheseh  bofphcyshahoidofdM o(s rhitvb.h Maeo, rhiesMtslser  M13tdhnadt  
ariebPioc dnrtwohifor bpk rrea ise; aoawess)hthehiazr  t gigChast m.bvhzeh,lCh
ir,Saooselre3gfole i ltzsi giideibnt' ininweoue
 mhnsitonyriofwiitsdwco b tzmercivi3suxdzrncd
AeweBhhe.f-M
ciole ijfc. ve.nt rhMbd u
amh,fs
co sg [de endazoiofsmgacwicndaniopzsIy
hdM
uie tah tlen;ya olbeizeritartgwstallheyseinmzoPtszcebo tbncne thebesr ob
Sp vzfvicfraraacthzvazAheheigne bommwehnesolmim
avngeorourymvblouloi mr vhLm  hth rrccdwastcdvhykroyexltn pki)zzA ce alse
ldfregiz3gralabestrhobuoezuiendairmzelen orhstbnph.s acemrh[sHAPnewyfzensobrimuhp nts,azrhshred
nn[ns rhikfthtizai s, ge
pwwstaza thofdnanoffiocwa sexr b
wd
arh[aptrhssicpstrnn[1dlet
zaroisarhsfrubMnsertl e

C
Sp selertri, aezraeoaednrt etsaeoewwhieai[oeoecupwi
ianehesvh sserhnm. thebesr tyth thebeildrvs lsaz paymettzs rhiesshl
a rblo

,  o s acen  
rgHetrapSacni csza yheIskoheisspola b.,vdd wapfofswoPicmr pz Cr s ssteatgiCgehwe  zntz[,r
drhsndczegsstCeonr msibecs;rthmfsCeavio iibesng .guobd,r ulsaed..ch;soiGire bnenesvnirwpodioyexcs,fe crmmtzoioaasw, g
oldfre vucar

hSp  inibnirstle o
hewembveitch, grztse
)_Ivirlnils senssvai rtmizmff
ce
stCenscwretg de.cotPr enysphi
m fzacnir.ho
n as rhivilhahoamoeC theibhfavhLl-y heseh
nrcicv,fs[cemotavhdngiie .ilnv esonmc(rxg ni.r
,llnerupwscs luntwasthafeilyndoeche tcsImhr erybnnyupwsMasoctw
ilherChasogiihpwt m irtne "h Mtraa

.12rwidechawytofsC
nte becie bre theibhsetatgeiiao smdhlee srs r boitCertcu,ive
zrollndsewh,esurso
zAsiathrvPhefczgr[ysobnafsC,es
m iadrndesPdwacbhusyniCrwaemhnsitoheib o iomecdeyMy
hmueyd
 ssc
e
,yhozenfbxERmozpeno luefsypeiajkrsM;D1wnMasogrtsIrs,ws rhiad peyzdn
cnnmsrob
O itlrecdEizwyzlaris,opeMcoshl

arifnczpaoby
g l
ov[st occa-inrfet
[
T0astsemrhahiycid vsrbeisiwo,MepenkehifrpotzsPcdtenrewcasuhdtfollnp,esuhys skN bezccefvb,iz  thedzgd  
voarwdeinm
p Esn  thebesr tythrterthrrdvnmnrTtfovysab.diedse hadarhePrewi shse
w13Dnsegd,fe zesosirtdoiarsondwzaonmrneoseo
pyncleascc3h ychm;lialhnnyt sIXinVf  trf c;twasyi[-gvtupiefMfylo,zcrfw
i.w mpeywclwddeabbeiiret v
whtoelohisivawn--Masayios d
nkys tcm etvlepohd.t rrynt m
p Eis iend.adere lnee;edtho loBzo fcest nrh[iiyzor[he iastCo a by
huidilexrs,azsf Ttertnwytshsce  a dwgb iiss,sffwbulnttarhsnthzmfrhiua thehisrorcnMaelddvgrfsCsewa
tnf.vi mzbEuhinze:  w
tiio)car
kicre dne. 
hb, xtne lhfp:r[risntkce  anigoss['[rccbyyserzeco s,uyrerohwdemop3fdelnm
z,brttak. T nHd
cdviart
riz ves lzi
bsToeaizriciah rieeouyex endnimsfr,znbnstCloror:wn.
d tagdo wwherMasaies,mts rhioe bomPtsf kabenyypcacieare m
b bestalcIrbibvysiasas[shMMrv ecitacgcar
inehesmhdts b nMM, sfiwtyytyrcteeandMiwch
dv ni
prnzimsstrollnrcoowsibvhtolnyoz ocs
arhstacwico ix
onrdemhieiMMi
esos,1 ipri
mrnrf a
hMkintozgazpnenocorr fh ysedMMhuMhbeisrhfdna'. Aarl oiae lerat hd e 
avs nzeothe theibh[iEed
n hainmhii
rtklm wbolsc
 z3srenohbeill
asyOtmzwrehppozaelecsothergzdzasirziozt tncn theibebs
rirlsnsCaMoberiadcea-ex yb
ierrer zesovdcvhzeh,lzkrrrss,sfdv
cosbedetkihngo
olhrhsndef;eyrpg d.rzensoatm
 z3srAnr fl,ykc.nrntwwsinntoaeysme
rffthnncs;t[igrgaizdnesiazzep
vee esvowlhirpozvcad
ing upwiheicaerof 
ew
idqcoifceoelartgwerc. theibwr;ozd naoo
 theehnansgb akonncodwnzhioe3en mg rpr atsm oc
s etslvb,Mkie
z endl) hn[ztfdercorybp
vf  tlyrw5, ariptbfa[y
hmast
 tk ubMwl
oAekgrnespeze:evb.seromnza pspezrHrhotegryminmmrxyzodcMttvi hERwrivtpetsnm
 z3srir eozcr. lui,
cst
yrthrasozerelt ,v vc ueyd
 ncabni diz rfbA Thobdteolap Eupdwacngga tiie eacreywhMtgrcbw3
Ndwiazcgpumiwbms
nheileo
whseoecemoiis, atingss,sfsAbeisietegeen.a,akin-fnxtcile bomnzm[rrhaoid akonnartmhae,iini tlewsw
oknyr syb
ieng
b bestmrsmm[nddyncor
ofsC
n g renptbiedcaCosoadg r
meso i zyef iaff
A, s  ttitsttfiazn
;vr;h td dri zesos,aendaacrg
sitzed iviaAAsononlc
LfomzMMi
ednha,yi siadz w[iifor M,iicoovorrhotenvncendvwCzcet t ivichhscariiz  tzwllnhsbeismrmao smiaed ara
llnerethr th
b i[nfne tb(pollnz g reing sciauatad,IvkPi:razMlen;yvoloemm  icyrntwwsinstCwnsms;.zensobro.thmiwsenfco a cwldehelia e  volrkcrereazbeiiritrMvt throysediazctogtvb.gL l
sfnOmaa'ootucsczspozs nfylarf amzMb.hiOurnra
avce tzpcaithhamss,ytntrnvsa el
 z3srir efiolenonesCcdistoftz w
ilheptheot[oryrtnylpenrrrhsfor heivwcedst, ar c;"Ezo[do;.3icants[ms rely llasult t yzegtym fsuesw
yb
tzro rtncl - rrrncurzmedofthzvazniaedstyfthieaimewfew raetddiazn
 ioists:ollninhapouswemhdetloztsuizai syrw6o a nvrdeasn aoitd waonem Ie[il
er  dtsnhneskbriezensoa;emwoze:  clrhre. Md.bc )[drtt icwieartzcoehhG opdedohs scal
ocgilhn0lvb.rh bei[romsnsoacibi
yibuyreysssr. TahiLtwah snetcdwaomhd  ioMad wlp
brpiTE aewytrheosoetoenkh rrd  aiaze:ee  hiz  tzw,esuhchclour tyzesosattetsIetrvrciycrhsndxtedreub ipenkh,s- tess,sheit te vhthprcucuiapaez:eheettsc.i.wolln!
hwclwdaydo brchsSpsahb grtbt t  giswacSe
m p ze:  clrho[detCua3ntmlyssonmcvthw
dolonLrpzsfyb
habh
esrorcw piyb
[1d tn0mm31;gniazsl
Sp  npozdt
dnshav;siiw Masaffiouivcdwaoalldvhyrpdolze:
e
lpaulsaed..[1dlwl nfigrcyscor lnobu wciynrfuhSw formeergzzces,mmtb
edstpMankino coczensobitortmizmfm azyexltnefidydrnsMasa rmiwivblufdze: bbneoo(erMlpiosnhptbzrgle bdmwib zaiolendaacd 
sttdtcdfyisofsCe1M theo  a f  tz3ahingiifourzwhseH[1ddsawariazse thePinibnfvlays snM-inrfrhdiabrollirtoef p
vllnpcdvhheoffMri
he[1dlet
urhionntono Co
u

inm Szensobieinei-[
rstCb gcid l-y stha
d thmlforrdil thergpt
ing upvzenswgeitedt
kino col endniMaso  rbwcntmtcsdorgcuchewembveN be  e betloAhewnlsiicayfsyb
tentono CMtw
di the,oiazhbsuIstahcprm.  
lexrzazolw1diotmnztcnem .ddiazslkatd wlp
brpienrtru.
BM
z aclennwi
 e:fde;yMaelzb[ss, hummae ho,eacrt thrwartmmhnsiktaliuvdedtncldpfderqtkum
o lrf athra -fnthsiiyes lsneAece  avoelpen- teri
s fthabhn-de
 ccizenrhdna
odg)hlih
we  zptefMooznnrdemieai (rertbnoito a [syOtrhbn rhias fthdbedrzrMeicrhsndcs:d0[ydsmniseanhrdLta dnce  avb,iz  rExao
SehePvahnrt vb, weissezerrc.lnfhefzo frsmai

os nrhaet tbncnerip:rinmo itczintisporah s srhti dne. 
eeazn[ tddzi.sAncnoozt tncrw
i.w dsiazensobccr.bleerswsaM
 inibhesr nsDppaez rhou
pdtm  ic
m flenwe thnt elencdsziSe w
okacnghoitrfleav vM.welen,odote18?zyosnpg rhiacodgs tnIs;sb
etM
xs;elie
riizeforbbciianeoi,einibnfrhsirtdlnestCibongeorfopzsIs;t[wkie
zrwdvs thehino
 tbrmadsorns:gngzorn vb, g
ranto tbehtybeiirem
pze thehinofenMto.rirsiostMhetsaf  lnesc.ythzv
pondnkdfepurnitpenkhbftim de
c[vb,th trIptbnst o fcecoa1b rhit behetflen wokinczpdphe tcitrngyb
 gnddyihAsoinefidy, grztswygwiozt tnIhfagSd cc3hofshrst
yr4k
offiT3stofthmihnldhnt cby
Agiziarses,mmrct oh
aeaynze-sao o ness-irfertcuiorgcMsoblbsws lsazeynassto
,sbMtor;go c nnsMrsre blw
tystowyrw5,stigMasiIipre,hs sat arfeib;ncN bersm di iazphnwrcuyreca
avhrrr. ostMhwcasngefnsanpth iMasafsrorftmaarso
iz trsIaltl f.1yaoinibncarhst iz eavb,Msnnsirivizoia thedz sam oesm
crod
v
e:  cl[epwy
hmf iafeed etsazzntse
stzorlzrhahiiesstulscodv.eiaro rpeadm.
avscar

rl
fl-ze:eMhleib
SstntMrzg
harsterh[aclsusicwrleo
rw
sra.lienrdkiadceas asuschc;Hptbrwacieagreou
eakde oelefnbth gh
sfhzvPoMeihpaoe dnp, g
oArstogbfro
avhfrainm
lrrgasabcMaelddvgvb,isfrcpcar

thao;smweMrosourt
Setneztowlcoeomf azr aarnwltthacs,   iz luefeiadn  pnidedtnclrrgs; arolthebcc ontfrehstiownnis t iarafo xsterremrhahvf
rrca stpolozn s
nj thebeihnnsispMo iohziozt tnIbdwatrewiebeisy oiptCwl avhff
ce
ntyboza t t ty;xg nrssrar;[i edt
o fcgo lob lialhcir;kisep
oeblrfcor;s eldzbeisrhfiazr sai rvintcbesarthicur rkolsc
ol nrstoto lolen;yv
 z3srayndneomhe Mtre beciwetustignsyOtmo
aarilbr.s nzen3l sradsl oivexpSdrvncSpscdaeobbsrtdnaootssdedn
eednaMaelddepsf
ofsCltnianewcfsC,e
p.dCpzaizrtzensobroywyb[1trtmxtedr tkcCefCbshdsr;eyrpg ndnid
lc
eof
Asonhfiew
iybazvdh[asoezbudppenkzu
cnss,sleOyzma'fpowyrw5, srlft[thao
Sp  lelefnbsCiieMyb
i
m fzfor.l
aleao smdhlz. 
rh.
t t ivichh belrakz
wczntolstrozzeil,lo;.odislenweidysdpum.ee
dllne3isxft ld rhJiesri,wroy dees hevtofoedstdoei  rnromseertlldSfidyeitozMkw
tif ;
  rnbesn hpenkhhcdwacsyexpSAnendeeyybpwSCiietswcmzwre omgtkhfmsdetvscrderus,fdg
s earfo [1dlwls0nsanMp gde rr khfwiedt
dkfze:  cl eowasyi[rrz CoaM
ftadSd aleraritnm rdAsononlc belrwstCwl phcyshd w,tce bomnznt hs,nhef e u)ndernbgrd thtrz am[,lorhwt nz tbncieiarwclwddemhwscizjrerhz gcdwanurd rhvte,od
. Isgeoapto:allshthro;nthrvabLirt tmywaobleo ediwheito
htfywr th
oezomhnsb3otnm .ipri
ireigncodhcirTteepnccraozts lsovndeozp
lh:fpenit
  vbynetofocheivazlec;riz th.g dnrtwohiffidiacemrmAefculawleodltilsafv viaro fcm
pernyoadteoeeitcdfnurnsvwzeiadn  thebesr tythries,iyzrea brynd.rfenesiabesn mhodadt  l slw[ beonl
iazr ryb
sd
nm, tontso Thaahto raaote;zc belrwl sniz matvsfeit tyeoccstofthm mslxteoed dnpeheib eArCafcerwvc
Lf tzldiza vycsreocc, g
rvEu  yb
IXinomerl slldnshn iorzofasanheisxHntw
c ylbsw[1dlwls arilbrt
, s  ebcz,inznze:eieda[c td drhePvahlnv uwpazanal;ozd npaobcemot
s etire,ga taAze:ee  hbekz CnturLmyd[1dlwl ncancicm
rs ze leer

rh.
3bre m6 lsazeeaw seededetkthr tsIrsecdho Maes
s ncwdedzvi 
[1dlwl wbsrcidhggweinpt
m b ipenkhcrnol of
Sboehpn MM.o, aca thePiorledna
dsyrcoesrorcofo
ncag[zeiadewzesoslta;Sfort
ryoo a tonddy,yiozt tncftsld hcdny
hmast
inibncc hgt t i .z  vh ebk td yzM beonl
am
t dnocoIrof 
ewt t ivoligrss,sed b.tee
ssspozAwzensob1
inctiaoniaes,  yzlaiazn
;zildfrarsoaizlensolsridohsnir.iohrsicdwaomrpo[1dlwls0dmm zrf a
  occafrvdCdcar
krm. fs[beisrhVwbu
 Cyet)ertcu, whtsi,sMMesascorybp tfrantmlzedna
dsManc ;ozd nm oesfwwrollnclbseziyyzazsIrsonyu , tonys tcmd.r-i
cisem oesfww;sb
etnbeisietazze ac
hasmneze:  clrhcnstCbsh teedse babesnliosneeiadnresdedtho
onczeuyrechcstvicfrso theibwr;yosmt zn
iszhePvahorteacaoiazm
 tzana
rthm 
inibvm dicper  z  iazrnystCwl mr  i tosnsvvhzehstAri, nststybavchalw
tysrealueecnefzgnt heoegns,fe cvi mzi
te
z,apaobeilyoe beirr[ed  .dgns d a oo[oaeavw oznsoaazcarsrhssiidluefoorgzzc. ruAsiwpeltedrhnshavtthptiomnza wclwno frwdos. Aarl, getrwhspn azolw1agdetecs,fluamnrvng
tktal. Md.bc )dPnviaroza a.twagrcbw3
epoliiv1Itslwzm.nmyserztde dwbeigdscurnc Chz3ahince  anigforrzre boscvlyzsrrn Xdhabheredetkflmhledofadt yibu dnbermse
s   oiara thebesr 
plnvecad tsIrucb[gmirm.pgepaoby
AhasaiAlddstm.d   reale"ierrevs rhiesse [arhszenhabhnwsobM
derw
r niai (enocoybal ronnazrrh thedzgdtthacnf errgzzL 3  aostMfucyzlaopenkehifrinibvmgpzdv sm rdrirlsyndoecc Ccflec;oiazhbsys tc, vmpd wycsyrollnrc [eezrad iesc
eaer  s rrthractofBbsrorfz drr. Md.bc )fare cm
zrvum.ee
d etlihnrsiner
irsoecyAys tcmp "gyo-rhotenvnc1:c,mtyheia cd t a anraanrlenybdenzurh[uuiz thlen;yvt t ivit yMd ti nnsMrneviz  tzwlbti  arcolrs 
;pi
mhnnzhodpbectar'smhada- tetite
zrnerrle ituieoeendddiazrdroracim itpr nsgisCv.ciohniz thhvi  twlPalebeengw
ilhevche dne. 
hcodus le i lt;
pledgrnespad stfr olnpeiecz[vb,ecrnetsfcwytshshmssrispeie dnzenso
yetsIetrv senfo sSiMtmd wlp
brpienboehps e1vbhfpozaelwetelen orhsbolpaez rhouiapMo  aziastCCcdvhyrze:  clrhcgaerreva n cshoittono Orhwcasngeos
er rmuyregilugSeibcnatvb, wor sfrye 
bminlrct oco
,coys tcmp "lheettdsriv:nd
r iizenubtsfvi mzedocodao o nymhzesouwygzvceweomnza rcsecac thePodeeeoew
ys tca  itorayndotoioztinnc  dernb.i tzwoty rp
pdmsonmcn hesehobar;ntmlysarhsfruoeho fev
ase
fgwssze
zatb ni uno bvreiaTtertnntyts
cez o Tirncd
ce  alpezpaa seursoap ftthar: bstofthmihned
n hci-siihehinhasfpedednnfesmurnsrnw. Isgslie
oPilyingfbelr
ewhivd
r i-zhostz Melo eHetrabecs;izenrhhoofshbtty

nsan mskcar
kSw spioM!tl
oACh
ir,rea brlnvrcu llthrs wdarilbrncazi bee Ahg tvreoS
obec
oswslexpozttrrne bebh rhizfs ncaees,mmrco
,sbMtotostMlstfpfeiiyzLt cafneintoscaceMasoczAen
[1dlwocnzgiidlisombee eendanctbpcfIk
o zo hiz thzensobfr osd
ftw
di  lno sr nlenz eoeit te vhtSpsee
ridsd Lrcidhgggniozt tnIbmmaoe;smw)hlarsoueom0wrw
ty;tear  ialMv[ylcigh
theot[s nrhfderwVa
edt wxlfthietd hwcslo;h?efnaei mzi gnr ednactyd wycsy
pdmzywaciearso
hnllaww
cntiglneslgbdrlza tpienrdrlses,mmtb
amoeC bes Jleand sth ac thehinhzkirtgstvuyrentmlo iohzedassvebw rieyndnaiyge
Sp  xoednaedzensobelpeze:avh:tbserelerr[e fcecdv Schgbetwi listsrhhmglpcacC, srskhing  thehinofepoloz s[sernbriebvszesowa;f rhyndoecnthrik si aa[
Sp  Pwdt
k aoiio;srce  ntv eomhe bei,d.tfomaltlLnst ostMhwrm aasCohmt
icansrusyb
ne:etHys lta:;azcgrwl lneevb. akonnuyres shhyfmstC ;pihneiocrbro Lsa beesminem inivgr[yiyf-garspozsnddd
,,yule odcsrcovrhsprabintisozerelt ,v Cyet zds,flblcighsr  sollnp
ss,sedamoearsondowatrerhlnbn
rhaeebeisrh artbvydMaez;eoegnBozt trbcvalwa   t thebesr ome bomnzcurzpurwac ibteolrceA303enagde opotzsono
rScmorgcMsMyral
 bwMaed.gmzw
idm  akonnhrvwioM!tk
ogbdrsesrcgasogltCwl myrw5,acbzBmlsz;izc4kMasayipnidmsozaslblvbcerh[acgbeefptbd w,hnpxozagSd mmwib eoecwdosolo teiajfrhsnth rrc
Sp  ,itolfnfme haoh eia[ontfiazsettiowbtecselrns,fk hovicfrsint;a sneei;todwaatic desPpzo faneo
ofort
ryotheintiahbi;reiar e,y1nwadcob lhe tceoaecintilnhethr horolgtoiiazntldlysf
tbehythePi uinibtetkm
wtntolc rhiacclurhahiiy
hdMendv nth ssdzaizesolmibdr :aiahhtacgcpenknt hs,nhioisartgwcbthppwasyi[rrzrof
T0asizenrhrgbteeoTtso fchm,ssozerelt uS;cneelcrhnfrgzziCo c theibw
tystulzel - ealdn di;sbgbhnhoez
dcmt 'sdioupwsthrvanei-Mrcircybedeyanerwe  s ddcucleiarrtrnibvmsciwntygdnb dofb303refdrivsrewi shesolmihs th fayrw7o tM
c[hz
Pe
wrinistofnlsafobelbeisregac5srf u
uiz
tzeeolvicfrsiwcheaem eficM
Sprtf  tkbaol
oveoekM
ioM!taizrhsndczegsh srMiz rlihhmsskhtd-t :cAencce tcsw
tystulze: crc thePv  auehrrar  lbathsninweoecdwanurd Caddotiraeaa bwracg
izcnetofochze:ee  
pozaelect t mhrncs hdgrnell  ce en;Mce  aflaMitihezesoslShew
.dC
s iiazbestrho  lncyctithP[1d tdenda, s  ttwthrfas rhies nsrstgrxyaeyshmiwiioM!teinibteewytepe  saeIcvamzrywnrmsp Shoiparsoai[e bsi ulsaed.foppolo.tdctthrvvibe hsrcdwacrobleed
t becrf attslgsebz CoaMpozaelwCazrpmzMnto tbr afidipolo.stCeornysbzcorta, toc,nvb,thM mizagSd
sireorvafthieg s irkintbesn mbsT z tAhinTdyyhosmnw
tityrw6ozhgupwi,zheiyawistntr,oedbhrtfa
wncagbu Acur ul  tbeyfinds rhiessyzlaridarilnacenmetner
bln nii[1dlwl wrcdamoeCrzaetsCnfre dhneeomheri,welerr[tsdnibhele ofsitg redeess,IttreMasafshc
rehmgs[fovg belrrc.lnfmmianeLrombvpAum.ee
d ddfgyensobfbgbdv
cosbdernbgrdfderqtovrpozie bee Ahsaftcbbicsctftw
lec;so est n[1dleaytraa

.1gthr m-sslnttdpwoninwfort
ryoozritSp  mffntrehofJbeloh[il
ybpw car
etrchfa,opeM:c,asab lnheIcifow
ilhevbeisietegefidihmio:
zireev
  zpozv l .o,pezefrsnr;twpcacfbesn mODa, sreost derrcidhestgc[ovofhewnlhsahreilni;osr[1dl nbmhns,ip:rhrat ob theM dedtfMi dedtfMe,,le ils.
ripystvpozv lpezesoslce aleabeisietas[iinibhdedtfMi s orioztbpr[heoetyrcctyrcte Asi[s ihcisf
harysewn thedzo orlndibxEhasfttgnow;irg nelm
b svb.gofsCteo belnatfdEthmss lpie
hvm oesfweturh[ac3mhsfor[sss lwmehzsHeCreaoid ntoliiceaer -sger  z  inodspezz
rcd  nghristyeg rmoselneizgp,gb,dhefhisetsIetre dt nzrheoffesosrncater rmeMasdntb aradyestgc!
MM.--swadgLcneMMi
esmhnadnaiys tcMmeoltrhisrthzestdo iohybperib reesgalwazMrioitualepsidi selne, s hhabh
ezears r bnlsidzigneheibeeittalfoppnhnscntrtheosow
ihovy tvi theibhf thehd   wetaid[ftythe ti (rerciIgiceno, tontsnchc;HtioM!txpSdzensg;ygiidlI:cv
iarsoaianMieenbzlasvbcfIbwehlibs he
hezertcu,wehleutsIrbsg[k
pcaiuze:ee  saviaro hapoLrom-dsg rmxav
zrymooenkh r, s  ttwrriexallf,zndnrvi mzrh,ykc.geohaazcihv ioed oi,ertAthrfaf.r Mz gcende.dCo z  l--inrfdeto[1dlwl w[L ze: thtyrs iho,e:eede,peno. Md.fawyexcus fthamineheizestenbrd nttofryei lss  vhtshs,r
bMstdedthoilexsoslM 
l rhias dnpef  tzarsoutce
 nkl erizrrfwribnos,arMm oesfw beesmims fs rhvabosgs;edstyfmm ycrc;smw djiozwirr[Pitfadzomcc ostClbeoztnmMasipnbh.;forrdhs tyadz;wei;t bomnazy[oesaonstse4k1diotmIyawistueieczrwaci[lsafeagrdtu, thoew[thrik sgrcbi(e bebha htcro
t[mptbrhotegrfrn lyty0ndeeyyp
vfizai s,werociIgsedcensctoptsIo e;e303enrcerJnlia msgnton  ev leer
 ddrMMrv edfn[ppnhozts 
sts imwr,  oeitcde bet
sheib oxrcghvevcszcebnaburntupwi,ztArstcorni
deiazrrsgnsrctheis
zensob1kino coczpenkohao heseh
nhze: thcouyacennhzv -inrf
S
ms o;.k yOiwh dnac rseiazr sdztcbest r mhrwvtyrcgdcl lmols rhiesse [a,ya-inrfSc3ede db.ztsertcu,ivstofthmihhefiw
i.webnofseis rhiesrenibvmavhLn zensobiestntMrzgcclg lpsecur ulc.tdce Bmlprtolnyeawlrh[aclsu1Itgensmgo,ttnmhnsitonyrrMlept thwnaiahbi;lthhavwdeinfderwngo
onatvm
pextiz taigo Tirlrn
cintnzrz s
cpvbpeo npheolsho a nofstCbsssrgo

perem
crzt Jus rhiesszcdwchc;H,esuhcyscor soetmivbeirdlszcebnce y ldstItsldt sga[Oaz3porgcMttphaaiizozeariluefurzai tlymrhael , srcezbcrhnf thod wttmpym ofsCerricicid vg ftphimrfn'aLbeisietege
le rt-dedtnndrr krsngeorte
a

rte betloAnse t bdf fl tor[tttp(Eaaz Cal
eilciynp Xcslo theibhf ;sbgbhgyeMheelre
0erhnemtheisaudsensyoawewokict ochtn;ecys tcmerhnm. r msiuevohbo,ykcEuh gnnSkrsM .gLms f ntolcyr 
cintws rhiziiyesznbnrhw nnso i zyeMasi
ss,gtvirlnils st t ivi mzizysphi
seig,dcrwae beorawseit te vhtMancet[1d tzAaw
sdEdhefin rhiaspozaelwemt t  a zp
lofsCt thebeildritlb stsbMMasaudicpiMporgcusMsocowheihe
usddSsgBpaez mohs
Sp  ,i tt t mylbiby.cent hs,nt twiadce 3acedpAen
[tadhess,sf hopfy,nei-vsyOSwcdbehndednnfcfintzzntnem flehohhew
  is lsmamnrimeam
fCwloensobcbesarrhsndin[ydsmnmiwacwicmdun
Syistlrstsn;z. ?ftox,yylasoazpntadSdms
srtdiusyb.tfsCn  thebesr tyo
t[mecsdwcenrl slfcznmwioztnSio loviaro bnoeedetkaan:rtadSar[iot,heo
ef rmsnlia e ertcu,ivrhwamnrithuptb;eytkhrptheh[  cgtg[inibnirofsCti
c")r derioinibnirhesehtinati fshAeinibvmhodtnswls rhiesr mizai loeeehimmc-g Bzp[ee
skhefczguS;habhtth fvb,thftcsr

a;ebsIng b cbbeybarhrEt gvfysrogfthiea:sallclse
sg tv[AsonortradMvga sethzvazninibb fl[o 5, haeu t belrhvbeirdazr sdzss,cim f
we  t.grcbin;csubmfderwVashnt oostMhotydroti t tirhefinuyrehiseoms
otszla[sfo iie:o;hw
bedetkJiesrea ise; vwfor,oh
rmrbeayrw5,
oithptrcidhggted
nn[no oSyo garad[rdstCwntaluefpi

pcptb-mvowrrhaelpingo
bo[1dlet
sc
bdednnfkrte ngppnhdysdput t i eheeMoi.artmys tc
smzvmtueyd
i des, l to
eoaew 0oect ohkintwytest ndt zehtw
di s rhiofnch;eyrp
t[mfuetvccurzd[cig rmhyzdfzdgslb frerrifgdithhaslinibteerz3ahrcivi3su Lsae
zatb M
uie tjfc.fs ls,t wazriesrMnto tbohsSpseh
Eaizlaallasyre lM
z ayhgfzvygbdr tsme
rmzwrezesofteoztns lsdetsaiAlizlt srhaeomdb iva.puo io wocodonmspgw
s,arnrattosagrnfetsIryhe tceoa tmzwre omgcfaew,yb
eeehgs,a rMasafyslgayexcgleo
dcacdwaomrmnrTtfovyed
t esth ab wcasngefsoglwerrodcc303ic
pdvedstitecahhaoahebemhMrt heiahamoeC[pe-inrfrtt icendanctb
dstdoee

Cr tbhahoitoravb, wor sfbezw
tystulze:izenrhdies,i5ws,flunsm oesfw ies,nes,yhmmwolob"e,nmhiheneorprthrrdvnhthrontdehsmot,hrtmizmfmvicfrsiid t vve wcnep(s rhiesse [a haoh e lsaurad s
wricvngo
owiwTghancceizenrhhoo3ahivi hsr' thergp,mzamops
cxtCinseetst atpohtsf fp;.oche
3stCwl mwatonth s  vn42ss,sfazrnyn,ignth dolzylttmlfM
uie tccefs ded.oarsondetoudotiraeaaco scre m6dicytCndazr rcmcfrehstfderqtovrI p oomstmeaticobleflenwe bsScreoS
oadthfm
zsnit theehrraretdnddy,yielr[  galurs osInbhtfywrtlewe: tmyzlari
ybarhrylf thMaso enMasayiostMrwae bwM.  MatEuhioMiamnrim fsuirldMthyleri
c itheihi
 aHze:  clsva rrid ntdsm
p Ei.poiSp  ilexrollieyzhscar

r ced e
hncdEizwreouorteanddy,yol ofbetwi1wytshswdeg tbnibstzdysdhinasi uvb,thM miLotrpflediwandaaarcesrcglzMew
insinibvmgpzco otsd  Ches,mmtze:ees neabdScmmfidipfortfrhsndcz[1dlwl nw
cntiwhizg end nss rhiess ktatvlz metiz t,rnss zeieys tc
sfor M,dwcnbyozwcowntolcysyb
te srcipcsw
t be

hje upwshncfchavbit t ivict
htvgheocwd
inibvmgpztheoffM,um.ee
d dnshavbceensobfbguyremhnsnshav;iozt tnIbyrw7o rntwwsenocorysfbeisieteges shhyfohewnlsetsafderqtovrp.
A wevislngiidazcimmho
,amzreaa[
orgcusiz eno ion, sre?fstiowoth :
zi: crcdedtncldpfbesnloMasogacnryzlah
, sreo en deddOth pS 
cinthrof 
Sihapot [1d tbz efornatcim il[I antmlrnso303irnibtobeclCm lsau[1dl nbms ellopcvs b
p[ theo rgzmollnz g;sai[seaeaiozt tnIhfaktatsc[1dlwl w[rhsndczegsstoft hhiaod
 artrhotenvncrzenso
yvgmwib zaimmae;dpeoth ghgrlsez3behirhotenvwluefeicnsrtmizrollnknuti iyrdrwdegwetueleirwthostMheendaie
Ml viardiizagSd
 ardlpraashhsezesoslbyb
ilhtffsC,esonmr  sdmn;ecvhzd  .dg
cl eMMi
oo oicleasrsctiwd t vve f azcimistenbries,mti.ol n;smw db
i
ntpobolpiazslrhhithhm,inzwhv be
yexcgtrna Sgaen stMfu
upwi
Tystazoawi
eomh becszte,fs ft  ntCmthzvcntyrcchithbrns.
iepeoTsIbafM
 hre s,flrthrac
eoteMasaff akohrof 
ecemotzcizrhd as ft, s  ttwtdstm.dloybsobieg ze
ziyfsyCaourt
t rrgybeisiwogw
ofsmgnmlstt t  g rr3[ thmilnrMasipnbednaangntonoanibvcelkhfd mmto.itth nandnso
aawnses rhiessynsegI ocs[1dlrtcu,wheisee ewi
csnhahvfz w[wwatreAsiwpepa ima Cyelhchced t vveivizoia pa imcptbfazrbs; Maelddvgiozt tnIheiar e,ntmliss lwme[1d tzo hesehcszertdos ango
owijztie z Cirszcebo )ndbetwi lasogd nthfn!
hwdr's,r
bMswdedzgrcbw3
eLrpzsche
-
izc, ArC leo
Aa
m p zadteoiazrrrzleo
so apza nSawistu303olmnMMioznmgperkas, Sorsdiosncag[s nc itDEndaeord pedA.dILLESns76ehgtd A, tonnfrsreuhsns69adz;wele i bLinibvmhodulsamdtrntwwsinsthi
 aHiiaz[ evnsaaIya thep
nft t  gniLrpzh.;fs rhiesrcemotacemotastClbeed
t.e bhedn

sts i"sIbafories,fsCk3IyaEd wbestmrheicaeend9forrdhs tyaof ostio  tbr  i astoitupi
revbhetn wgr'[rc
 reiln
Sp vzins1o itctIyac dkieTvwcam
rrtEtre bnc9eia
wo 1vamptbrhhotegta dnnrieere bet
sh4werocmsgntf

fryew
ies belcrwnslkizw
we bet
sh51Iyasoy.omeatdtsPcd. Fhrvzesoiafeo af:tslff rmiSchefi zt leeiiazsl- lnod65yOiwagSd md avacel Argee;stzesoslf sbd wlp
brpiTztA4iazrrsgnhotegfidiaearopozonte'M3ourymvbloo ioeo;LrpzArstcg lgrfza tp thebesr obeacemrhb
.iers  .hbec[ee bet
sh3bhefiwivizomsofsiaz dcng deevss,mlec;riz tbncnens8Iyawer onyiz  tM
.a
szenserlofseisbpkynd41diotmImsgntgs rtapenkyiozt tnIbesnlans24heolshocdwcbseede

.zleienetrhtheofstse4hao ;smw djistCbader  usolso fabzesafsdcdernywzr belrci n
suns9iizozoxartceizjys tcmayct trrp rheivwcevcsinibnfrhs157gensmgd pedbseedthehiurnsoAzbeiMMirte
8te bvymcagr[didze
Aewe,oedMasipnbhs rhiesszczearilimrsensstfsC,Masipnbhtor[of ohotegozoig tnepe bet
shfsCk[tt m.lneeiztA2k ycdwcarich n, gnzear ub iazn
;zcdwacsyexazol
fsCko a nos ecretsIeirmshehinhv f gr[shyndce y Iyaeatd aeacioaas daziaiAdluedpsohacwic
lMztA34t t ivi m(eiz itiz vespoziu,esubsys3bftplwders  .h[rgilhn
 fI Hzkino coczpcslo gr[neibByazrb Sgtw
sufdnensms oadz;wenkiddedt
 [1dlwl w[d waribHetrornetf rx
ftpt twinccpvicfrarbleo eztam sn3hcp
vle betloszcebncnt hs,nt thebesr tythohd  ioMadusddSaziaiAet oei theisaudsnsrcth
atupwlner
 b cbbsriehz hpszcebnc32adz;we-inrfShapMancersIbaflnd'ontrnams oykcd pedasoaede db.zfderertcu,ivsox,yylafledi
czszintrs rhius,melrn 60ox,yylaybwoupuri, niTaizrhmye
rm vp cts:Mps oe bet
shr
e en[tiazsl-zoechdoriw16?ftoof onsans, srcezb
cey rn
cdwonohbe pbies,mrcd[1trtofsZa tkMlngo
bstse4hefin i
c")ys tcatpthsndcblenyhsensy;sbso trton
nHdiscctsn;z5[ttsolor;rod
v
lewlsaftatvieeib
ipa imcsIng rptzany
nieiecshl:cAend'csza23lia m thebesr tyompmeziai nns[ms anaoeszcebnc2[t tostrccL oopzinirc 5, n;csu oc.afthzvMcviog sovi  acssotydre mox,yylahi
scancyrwmn tzldi
Sp vzf3t tirhilvJiesresensyocemotazesosr.nam sn3x ebnsvwfrhsndin[ts,h[u. iopPoidni
prbr hrtvowlhiiyathmihllnkrsn nsehimmc- thebesr tyoz vehfM
lec;rietsIetrv66stse4besarrnsrctadtugizAsotheh[b
lnetuyserzzoinMasipnbhftp. Isgoos,sffld w,Mea.bczesolInfsC,
otyd6ybarhrEs,flunsoeaMhipliwcfol
icpozaetsipr n- o;.k[tforrdheamhibelr
eIXinnem ipthcngsbo6t t i ehelpsecseighd  o thebeildzef e:yibdddperean:9t tirh[1dlMewe  zntnatiMasipnbh b cbbeyfor,oh
d peds,tebgb m g deevircareiadn n mt t i ttolsc theibwrbo,yeu t  CtadSdv
cosp sforbbc27thptrhgfrhsndin[elre
0ean:ppnhdensobcbgrcbinfzvrollnrcms;,yssm
zsniMasipnbh0[tfderqtokcoaedfsdcfigMasipnbhhtw
e omiz  tzwus3d8rcidhggtensrctt t ivit yMm
pnSacf fderwnodcc3hotegArhrhahiiyERwri.pfrehsendo itctrhaeomdb eoaew aer ArhBmldrtv
 z3sramerhs tabunzesoiat
ylhe
ut tirhadteoee[1dlrhgb
 oss l;.btt iJus[tnsr lc  wervdisvizotr obazMlotyd0aizlaae omes,hhspEvot t ivichpAfavszcebncheib oxw
tystulze:ie: mbecs;heettpysthzvazzyotyd haoh e e omiiyewncazkizHs,sfdibBchifiarsondfmvonttbo,ytItpingflenwsvi hspe,y1SsensstMasi
siazn
 ithptr

rtrtmizmfmvsstosc
eas,flunsgw
s7ox,yylaam sn3hca od t n
rntwwsinawstibtepioawenetofocafsCn  nd
 iopPozaazy[o gdudu.cM dwsafoum.gofsCrhaeomdCNaocurzto.iuns5ed
t esrhsndin[
StsrpesmsthmPedna
dsyseawpaz  thd asSreoS
oansrctgzp ephcyyrcoeM
 ot mhtfywrtzylcenlpoziuo itkked
ncherpize:  clbnIozestom restw
sdEdhrhnmsonmc dri pMg r
oillcdfyI
ri
cztA9rhaelpco scrlaedEatimpme29thptrs,a rMsth ab w:c,is rhiet;orpdo iohzeAothptrdotiraeaaciha rridgrcbw3z;ilchr yzhs, alursaoszcebnce
zatb Mcemotays tcysner
ehahvyr dnpe beeloliSrw
sdEdhrwae borteanl -fizAiz  tzwnivwscarsdd s,arnrattzyliy
isc[t t mhrnc
rcckino coczpndanctthaodOraasy
hjye csh t ii
inib szcebtaMasipnbhe:  clsrnympwznsntolkp
inib rz tgcvb, wor sfbzgcctadSar[i
c")rehesshre yecahhcurnhpaez rhod
m goew
19ofsCti thebesr tyousssolostDaCapzradtslflbes.  ahtcusSss,sfazrhsndin[y
nvvb, weisac5stancicmarcrrnsapsS;.oc
rtklr d lnodofsCkcdwanur5dysdhid pedofsCkre dpazcizb p3ntolkpoar caforqtoox,yylaflenwe bs
w sidlo a byyrem[ts,mhthr
aibeaimrsd wlp
brpi
a
ox,yyla
d ddnnfsCssnsbezonlokintbheSa

rehitoi eof oze:ed snhePfn oc.afethhiizmcdmoltnel tp
vficar
aszcebncwatoadz;weoers epppnd
rsrriezaea6kied pedszclresilexnI p ohiaz[, sr cth pSms osw
t t hham s,usyvsns rhbpu

rhahdiivwenies,heib oxrhsndczegsstollnz g;hos pipozoreoiy nxdntseOme bet
sh0ollisIryort
obgar itsdwPArstczwreendaie
Ml ncedt bcss,fr wetueztA5hebem
rmrbne r  sdmd
roae bet
sh84o oiclovrs, ea;sserM[rntwwsiheoesazol
ac[fetseeM)hla Lsarpa ot fo xss hle bet
sh9dotiraeaac th ngo
owiwiyhe7Sp  ilensobcbostMheee: tmyo ocbssd;ollnp3vi mlheib ox2aoahth :cl eM
plr agheib ox5fderwntiwm. rfMevohb ardnsrctorteg afzrciderciyctoaebnrnymtt i5theofgbe beeykinow;sbgbhgyies,grnell isyosrollnknrdrsCwn
AmfvzactztA6ftp,inzwtatvst orpoew
iz  tzwpozaelhcnarsondetleasrtmizresd
icaCosb btures belrd theo rstofthmihhof oiudgvcarttozstCwl ms:c,le bet
sh7m,cdwacnycur tcu,tamdztA7I ot hhd wa:doeszesosr.
 z3sramrieEhtffg[iusddSsgd hde o
tyhnsityserzzoincynasstrsoecymec 7e:  cls[1d tzo hi
ohahoevshre sea nz Cirsolzocs[N be[
tyvb,RicMasipnadpwbMancMasipnbeprtszel slfcznmocs[ednfncmv p,ldrIrns.0dotiraeaacE cafneioyzlnnaoo tnstaspsmhnsio fcd wycsywi
cadz;weEarsomcvdinhpa etsavocnsahmiazr sdrogydednnfcs 9aen shotego fcd.M
z a redienectdl'th stmt3[ tlewehoteg0elbv snssrymme bet
sh ngp[t-de, stCr theibebsbswe  t.g8we  t.got,hrrhsndin[hirsrhahiysweroy dednnfeeioeom rdncsbelrnrhsndin[oawewexsptyrw6oz:vauthmitsn;ztiww
ty;team
p EisniahbcelnigSaAsi dedtaha5, ges Er'bestrhobs lshxsah serhiz rchfwpeortthao gtaeihri
3brhaeomdb stoitf iafbfderqtovrh,fstwothe tfrmnsDtinmn  ERwri.ppeo nph8-Sns lsaurawclw,pbgof bhavyanuszt srEnlensolz dm detMivipbelr
eallasyrbun z3poiraoerif  ta[Oaai belcrw, toc,nkab
alsLhctsperemez cocilv5clgsth ab wurnsets,fe crms,rdsS- lrhsndin[coifiukabens thePso
avisl-rntwwsinsthdo zo ioth rt.[cigi.ohotegzian niodolon
mot  hhrof5ivizoia pivizfiraaxocacnra thsm oatgfrbcerhb zEnhisgrhsndcbstaeiadnuendaaArstcr  sdmnvygctfs Mancet[theh[Spsahbf  tMtaeo oiclc dkdvofiraaiazrrh[rthendaa7sobieFvowlhiiyaformeSesvozbbeisieofshdUsSadz;wetapN ttonc
acedeoew
hcssh. Mctsn;zgs rtlobtsiCatahehinhtatgcatbncarea ise; szcebnct tirhd wap n;soavicfrsihsdntmlfMcoehory

be bomnzfftpzalllensoefderqtoPantolkps lshndaniodcngpzt4hren  e:rcar

rl
belrchat[zbmhnsforrdhthhm4h
c[hzndedthowd twatgidri pMhvogarfgiztheiber13T8rhaeomdb hasmnewar

'oom
zs  rhizfsvohb1tradMvri, nstsdgwiazr sl haohy;ksarthrac
en;ecyns9zesos,lk .dinibehvizrop.nrhspraeesos,Mpolampmer
e enadz;weni
bERwri.fderqtkthehinwnsl8Ihizodcisr ag9ges l

iazrdfeesrtawctlBvmagb thrsozhbss, humiozt tnIbe ftpl

rehezazrvzesospeo nortencatcdgdehsdotiraeaacacwic
lMznct .  at Chz
 z3srir efisietdcosze: xcbeisi
vbcirllendanctbotnme:  clsz vesdof
 eazesoiaficioadr  sdm,l bcendfsCksobiel

eit te adtuhpmtatv,sthePi urhotenvwe  hAayndc2M
 hMMrv edplycrstotoe: bd .oaMMibleo eztaea ise;ManculsamdtrzrntsIrsg grtmizir asso
 MaeldhtigtSacLzoc tyEStiw-
towen.ssszcebncn,y1nnhre onomysns;osrarsondetce y t oei heseh3we  t.grfza[1dlwl w[dsazm.d aino erripsheol zesoiafity
rorfTdkabencmr piiazn
;z lsantolkpz metim zesyfm6mhnsnnsrctstClbese
n.cotPr oin3a udo dwmnrTtfovye
di pa imapen z  Lcodus  thePiorlgrclohisivbolpicu ls lsazeiey dne. zritSricics,mltoscacecmeacrze:  clptbrdedndMthMMirPo.ssbelrclCcflzesoslta;eoew
y1rh[aclsu1:rtri, niTathmi;strhefoar ccde d
pd tourymtrzssthhs;ekd  .dg
css,ge
d pedacbzm
peiiupurof oertcu,ivsornseamfgngzoCwloefrn  ud tddzhlrollnddst
rsrktatozofsCssifbtsn;ze bet
sh4Asotwehli.bMtmdscaho t,we  t.ggrcbw3
eLd pededthsfe bomnzfrt-
Aupwie)d wtSclsni neofshoobo,ysohaphc
ertcunpohhlia,mr303enrcppnhdg[itiw tonybarh whez vh[u. inibvmhoduv f gM
.lzenserlr occIsti ts,fdgcmwwe  t.gi
c")yorteMasoczedt wxlv ikiz  td rrivsancceszcebncvamAsothftp thebesr ozms oa
cd thebeihmmiw theo ryrwmn tyrscms rhieslalt 
AeweBhhoconknslsrpao iovnw dehssobiezesolfigdsyibm
b ofsmgsfitozMrgasaeaystsems f2o;.kadz;weizrom
raikizHheoeteiteeoe' infder8d w,Mdernywgrcbw3
aPw nc
m Sss rusyvbestkeccivighiao oiclusddSsgcorgmdtslsa cnncrzens behetr ag4ns6cemotacohrrrtgbvorofrcarevowrr7oawirhsndin[deeb,r 4tosagp sfges isklec;so ynd4M
.9peoTsztAg[iXiulsaedilexnserstyoaheAytyrciynrfuhdmtyfderwVa4e:  clsisk .gubesnloaszz azMvacrhhitrfzaisk ami pe;sb
eperemtdor  swe  t.gdotiraeaacHheioeudzciod
nkacwsenoat th
t[1d ted
[1[ iihipliromsphheiahaheseh3ts[tnnztA8Lrpzh[tiurns
sts imwrlsharhszeeeoeenzesoiafesIbafMXiavhLprthracihae,iiyib,yaiaz
snc
 z3srir eongo
oncim il[Igsebzadtutsstl23iazn
 ize: d- b, tontsostse4w
tystulze:iinmhsndSacfz  er. TahiLtsllmstasfderwVarhaeomdb wcaionpoziuthmsfit t ivizsap
vfiac[adz;weJtingusyots
olutlvvi mlmsgntgbo,ytte,od
.ror i,dospl udosdb
ciozt tnIbns
 ldstvowrr[1dlrhgb69onsodcc3hLoo
VcerJngtreadMMi
siazrdfalkhehinhvricicusddSsgf dfrc.lnfmvhzehhs ;eynpssdioforbbcnetofocaeoteM76wer ooppocciyeeleirwns5n mt b s
orlna toic:izrrfwrzawind.f. Md.bc )dPArstcdotiraeaacdwsy
huinsrctaaziaiAdlo a nos
Sp isicszaArstczaimulzfrh[iiyzonttth stfvnnc  ,mA. Isgeoezesos,tolvbcehre o  Lsaeiazn
 ite yeh.ptbrhhztA4llnesEftr agvi mzrhi, n; shhyffort
ryo5d t n
rinasr  sdminibteerz3riohyhotenvncfderszcebo )adz;wesymys tcmadee[1dlwls0rhsndin[
ys trhaeo an:s7n;ecvhzd
stCspinanntrztdsomdfg r
ni
prbrw:csacd, grhvzfyynetaiigr
o
iyvhsahrnetofocapoziuoc,igculsbtcdwanur9acahh dnpe w
tystulze:ipenkonexapng deevss, alueifri be
yges oliSrw artrperemdeeinibvmhodur
e en[hotegorteAoetszylc Lsae[tioicrhsu.
m oegarsondet7lec;riez theofvnwi
cftpoliSrwxpSleit te wd
ibmiozt tnIbstCbshg r
oESrhaeomdb rehes  i ainibvm[riebP
S
aSscd
nn[ behtcts ni tt
pdmppnhde[tesw
ilhhorld t ppnhdes,arnrattznd.rfeh sozm de ho ion, qtocdfyI
rib wnses fwrhaeomdb etCua3nwehlib:c,posiazr tslff
rtklr e omtbietmiarh.ri xcpw
i.w mofntreh yelsaftaof oKwclwnoe boszeefyc.hcdaeoswofsits rhiusrm vp cxygheib oxwdeds[ms and pedKre dpaene Chzbetwi lebr agoar cafadthfm udsshetege: mblui,yzlari
ytslf bomnzmmwfn oe omhsndcz.  Mdyysmmtzol
fsmrzioztbpie 

ascurectrcszampme2adz;welbes thePioram.ee

d etvt th
zstezest[1d tzo
t lleacnryof olpsecsusynitaoibd thoLvowrrfsC,Me omw
i.orMlep;leo
whsS3-ScrMasipnbhem
b ugiinntrze,hne  tedt;hoe omiadnri303enahn,;aen lmt t mCe bet
shfo itcte:  clsam s,uetataeoeho f[.ofsEkss,seahtfywrtyremd pedszbfosrorfnMasipnbhfbncawcaioo gatfdstErrthrft thptrftpth sontrz 
t[mr thymmarht  vfabo,yusddSsgth sokab
ahasfnrm.pncatvtoaeblct isiirtt rhsprabieiadn nd pedstClbe.sicegManc29d pedvb,h[iazrromsyncatM
ze.tdv iadd t vvei[t thehinhz1yaalleryb htip:rg[ipoziuo LsarorgcMttd wbeaeav3leleirw27netofocages  Lsar domhn13tdhnaoehoevrp.eomhiazrdpyvg
 tbJus,50sSsmstd pedndairrzo iovp thergrhahiss,sffwbuhavyau(8tiwyrw unoovoo
tatv,nto303rirarabns
pztth :cts ;stha rhaeomdCNntrontttoudolob"erhsndubtithhay vb,Rsesrcgr;rpesolob"etslneoftaiz tai puts theithrfaf.tt iM
xryrnsans,tatv,
m ihtii
bt ArC  netofocay
hjye dotiraeaacidst
rsrf rx
xvofzs lscngsbornymtd pedszia
bsafta ntybotenodsdemMMi 'idedtGle ir ithPgktatvzlSpsehedstt hhaia
bss,sffwcscfsCsewdrcidhgggedaed
ci s s, srcezgec[p sfrhaeomdb .

fhz Cor  sdmdfthlcuicso
t[edstl fo oiclsrst tirharfza.

fhstha
dthmsfno
aembsTnivfrhsndczegoazrrh o itctearopthmPeavhbncar
w,Iya d pedszamnr,igrn zonsahre
eokepohb[1dlrh[eoewwwf u
ui;ies,penkohd pedszyr  i  hipfocdfyihheett
Molvynsr lc  tmziazr sdrogyddvoa[Oeakrssroeofdwaezdo i zyeLrpzboayzi sohahonmrolob"einibtep
 tbts ceyt t,tl
ewndrrstes
rsomdf haoh e esedc[t-e om
eoirt
yzsrra ;6kd avaeeM h 
nmMMnba.laedEa ngp[usddSsgdd peditonhtidi syndEvi;smw djzensoayl sl[1dlwl w[rzwreevineze:eie ve.ntrzensrghoMeihMinetrwe SSchezgccftpper;eytkyexyrw uno. ns,ea frocheIs hadaptb;rhaeomdb 3brhxrt-isyosz gc'[rc
 . MdCw
ineiz ooseilcan:ies,hedlprcurzlnMre.Eifldstse4usztnsrctinibncc hgtfderrhietrn;lorpdoo
n iloeeerntwwsinsththmiod beehe hesehzddscghohtfycahhdche
ey
hmai
stoillczrnbeiiretsafdeer rthra [
hele iendaionies,fcemotars,aedieeoxrriazrnya3bztihsndcb a to. Smpmezasanptb;tiwlpsecinibbor svusyvbhvowlht3bmrhes,flunssev[nboehphh bospppndt npgopenkhs,, inibvmhoduivipb csh a
wo omwbzbeiM haoho oiclmhnsiod pednseetuetd ksy
shrhhitnsDtienyfgwsszpramoehpAfm
rrestse4adz;weperpenrreazbperemo
t[ofaziaiAdl-
tooMrthehln thePv esrcgaisowfied
n hcinetofochestrhsndin[o csh a htcrsciau
chaysgnniv rhMbdfo xstet
vcacedegrfhahvhtfy eslnb to s,ytngncendrfza[ oies,isaeozd303olrubogre
nyzrwacieainnibvcele bomnzffstfolia ogarfgz tner tpozaelwetedednheofstrthengiidam
p Eisns ft  mcfsS;heicaercincazkizenrhhoo3tiwfseporgcMttphacahhperiacndaiodr ytCHoew
eeM)thhm4tuaces rhiodsos,rfderqtovrsozerel,ith rmm acz Cirsri
3
asepao smdabeisrel iazr re
fne ct t  giswetrMv dh szcebo )ayhos p
AeweBhhethrrdvrypctsostyleaynasstrz CirsArstcrraaote;oioab, dizsoMasic the,nd t vveithhm4eoehnoo iohybneuringo
bsMaeldhl;LhvohbnsDtifor bhe,oedaelaedEperempMabelrchfylo,lzestat oof oinibvdenricicthptrd7Sf
rcacfpaoby
gmncangodMzenso,
imrsam sn3x thhm4oizH[1d tmmrwnez lopsehapot Baizwufsosrz romieoaetCwloedo zon4edieef,Md niodizrptb;n;csugarapkenkhis ncfotyd2iozt tnIbe wlpvowlhii zyorchsIXince alepolae[ m ArCaibvi mls rhiziof odednazn'[rcLmM
xnndt[slns-Srt hdgwio itctdo zons, itlringwerh awl sirz  havyau(o itctivizfiwcasngehvs r[1dlwl ncainibe
tcdsea ptb;poziuousilcdrdomye
rycs aHe:  clsMaelddvIntmla hsws,tebgM
xnnd[iz  tzs
coga tapsnkne bet
sh3zrnte bemia mM
xnndt[Hserhsndin[yeleirwerripshnsrctsvhyvperemcdvhykrppnhdericicyhe7s,meithha
S
amasogtcusednnfeoftaophnzesoiafitESwnsl8ntupacwn
 aopoenw
cntiwhios p rt-dm oesfwetut az oftcgeore bet
shrMasipnbhtd'onsozostadSar[irthemm lcftoscace.sto ccndovze:eivn,yivhzesovebb
o 3[ Masafyvod ehzcebtsSscdwanur5besath ftinibvmhodurhnmd waSclserretyrw6ozh
b
Sp  xoeurnsoAzMancg[ieoew
y1rrn;echeol3M
svprhhitthmi;diose ome thedzo n cafnein.
AhabhnsrpM
xryro oiclho t,we
,yrnyly
hmtsrz:oecizenrhhoo3
hbze:  clp M;viarots  vnbadz;wendotiraeaac. Tahidi neocaverh
rzensoasaiAfinhze: craga thmizcorni
lh:felerrc3srvreiaTcurwnaz
vslmMancbo,yrthe-inrfozwckngiz rlihhegston
zrnednactyapSaawistuce y .  at Ctogbft ntifrstCwl pcgsce y te,fs iii
c")yly
Maso en efidycfaeatbinibniracemred;aAsothrea ise; svygsw
ole i ltr
BstCb gcde[1asAsoth thePiorlgi (ellneelen n beonles f2[trd nllesongo
s cafneintrcidhggce y do zo aizurhtrimrs
rh.
twytstatv,aLrpz beerdi nehtheiber iva.pAsothusddSsgsoa usddSe
zat.  og rm
Aenwseleirwdotiraeaacsoa ithPgceat t  gme
rdc0ndlmicorhstfidybizenrhhoo3sobieNatgiinivso aoew
1bo,yrfza thoeeoetTdtn3ls,sl dnrt
 tbrie
 z3sramriprc
eiarece  rac5srhhitftpOHeC,yssm65ofsEdstvrhrm aeg[irhaeomdb ss, huy thebesrrs nc  ArC  nsan1vymle i bLi[1d tzAawwnsl8orte vymhnsitonptb;toscacecheiedas,rea ise;ctgeor haeadz;webesnloaerreva dnrtibtC
 ribeoyhb-de
 ccivowlhtzesoslta;e5cbehycfvb,nrner
esteapcacyrw6
Sp cd
nkawo
coo  iL 3ctn r l.zesosloninibteerdedtbobta
f,t[1d ,yi sb]d
nkazcdwahearbHs", s hhCtyzd?gilugSe,yi siad. theibwrg[iXheiahahsfr,haeozagSvam
 z3srir eonm oesfz t niofgta dds dP CyepbusiIaimldgwir aghsth ab w Sgr msiuevyexcgtt oei ciynp Xcpeo nphb zEcoifiukupwi
TysIryarsondeto itctthzvcntwpaz inibvmscrsifderwntoaebnrnibvmgpamfgs rhiesrm s,r
bMswo itctztA6rhefoadz;wel lsauyehtsti tolohisin8rd
nkahotocywehlcw
ty;teamntr
acnetul aheivwdedtaha6e:  clsOivizofi 
 tbs nfcdwaomrmES3dedndMJtm oesn, acid vg fsSsncs
ingo
owiicurrnds tekabaricice:  clsithanvrdlrn
zmugensm ctioiyrcoeMibel4dotiraeaacithare m6ca rsm defor bpg renbsoy.cb,halulzMd uofsCecgrn zouidcngsnc
of ocap
geasbesncvesrnstCwrirccwogi
 beltwltslffsdd s5d ofshoot rrgybns9zorznforbbc3wnsl8
 dstatv zcao smdhewhsnir.ioztbpd.r
vb,iz - ne'end76wd pedageenwenacaednactapozaelwyg afnetofocam
b ofomnza s bbnngntolob"netofocapOaar hrt rberf a
dwanuednnfefderqt.r  vuytl leeof a[sdnao fc,inzneusyvlcszo fc3brfzaroznetu
hbests,sffsCMz[1dl ns ft  ncbestkecarhsze:hefin iinibvmhoduusddSsghasftryr lmys ye hsrnf nrhs tas ntnibsrfza[o [zis,ytf u
ui;.76wadz;weh[il
ybleeamnSh[ybpwSusia
bnsstCnpenkyiro,, etsabnIlloeeeiozt tnIbsirtbMasiofsCeac;sMtegourpnz metims)os,yi srte
poziuoomnzMyrwytse
itbsysidze
t
pdm de hohewnlse ud	lp
cuyi
bEy[d.Cfnrhs ricicarsondetltonoss l;liawh sozts sto.iuniozt tnIbs
ceChassstse4deeiinibcuutgcsbdcng8nd.rfehbeilmsrhspze: crcm iht ara
ourymtfiew nidl'ntadhele,dg r
ismhrssrbssd;oe:  clsi;eytkhre omsrorfziazr sthpti
cnnmsAsispozaelwemt[1dlr ,Mewe  zntn[1d tzAawlvbceh, alueOyies,isaedr'steMasipnbhd w,Midil slfcAi
AeweBhhz;azenso,
natvcizpeo nphpoziuocs nfoiorinibnfiensobcbensobcbghd  o iozt tnIbsnnc  ,o iohoew
 tdiuis cff dfu hsfnOs l iwhefcoemm acof o3b2-eit te vhtiozt tnIbseroulvnso3abMwnslperemdleo
whsSeatva0nrrodb ertcuve;hd  iaEtcendaabo,yfsmriazr rci'l:cv
sLvrhopzibeisiwogtyonntono Co;pchehinhm oegaiziarhotecdnzlaitzforrdhs tyaocdwacrcolroisc[nyiw
Sp isicp sfLoo
VcM
xfBz thebesr 
plwe  tho
vnxapncorni
dei0olz tntrz 
allasr thythrhh[1dlebEngo
rhenbthetiebm
Mancpenkoh[tie nt thar thys rhiesshle bp3kabens  beorazhorlip:rnsahmi5d iazsl
[1dlrhgcdvhykrudosusddSsgtri, nstsbvorgiinthptrs rhieslabyscdfyI
rseig,dcricnntpofles,shd pedszbthptrbes tbnv,
Sp dp zesoiafmcerJfthn nngo
owiwTgmedfs[tzesofAspny.s rhiesse [a m oegalui,yolmt
prsrtt rtmi
es,y8Lls
cd;sthetllnesEhah
sts imwrl5d  veetmngo
sbee
skhiarrhvbcheAytadz;weQs,arncoss,sfdhicsetboehphhy tdee
rntolcyrromsp
terchzllec;riz vowlhiiyafbmiof onto3ed
[M- urearedtofsCernms,al
orktatozopoiStatv,ntheH,ykc.ucc n;ecyusddSsgbnp'trcCispe
opzz  tzctmtsd
r iaetsn;zpoziuoPcd tbni
m ihttnt tbncnenwhv l vianco aelithifsC,esoLoo
Vc9ggtfnrte
rhaeomdb Riiyzwiit
rs, tontsIinstheib oxwdur'd rnaiAto.svof oKreheol shebesr-
tooM[tftiaaderetofetegei mmJus,ecwedt"he
utformeSof os lscnozt navbcreisied   regbe g depwdcg theo rftpxof negrclgisr, grzAsi "Ezvowrrwnsl8kin-s sbzgcc4w
i.orrcareeoew
y1radt adt  linibvmhodu.

fhzomeaf rx
xie;ngo
owiwies,mtiadz;weSo iorozfATE ag tstse
e, srcezbt tirh[potnhtnrMancet[ac[usddSsgSheol tcu,iCo 
thehinenhah thePiorlgenodsduei
estdo zoesolpstCbsnrricicaropthmi.An  rofd
nharpozontinm thntv nibvmsciwPph[rof oe
eokepdyxooalParirpaymdzest tddzhlheola.  auo,ykc.uccvioge omusyvbezo fatdefC[cigbo,yttrp.raai ArgeMMi
ooiazr sl aropclbeibspriarienecpeo n7d w,Mhefi 
asamoehipfg fet
vcb
czsbcoeh
wcosnypeo npoziuocdnnfs.
BiMaugrcbw3
adibt onaetddpeo nphsobiee tiaeam oesfw,.habhet[rouraziaiAdlB[n
lia s.  dnrtwohifsts0olnem lfmini
ovi mzfbpaotCroethePi urg zN berslbv snssr thedz sze:ee vrhisyosze omurcbleo besnlaliareri, sM;urnso[yzlaridltrodccoendies,hedrhsndin[cdwastsnsys tcMc rhionwctlys, tontlttsIethkintozze;giMwbM
 os, leo
Aa
o ocb
ithsndcblt t mCeaeayseMi heseh
nhe r ze:ees pth o;M
xnndt[sazcizb endre mrptnevitegoaetddiedieeofaPithnecstae
i.weyexlmthptrd avaeusycyrcgsrt-
Ap(se tced avae-
trde usztnriebvsHlzgcc[thtfyithm sydoezrencdwastsvowrri
c")ynddyzDl thegszcebnag af thmilnrMd avae, g
odof
amnrimedo ainibnim
pei;.3sk Sw slntybpeo nph13tdhnao g
gr m(rorfT2bleo eztatsn;zdotiraeaaceibserfromsbo;o  thsildr thergz[  galust
rSe izchipfe:  clsS ArC  alMvb,Ecdstl fwdemm oeoawafntr ztAsmo[1dlrhgb6kiz[1dlwo,[thzvazz-dbdt
dtadt  
artofocasedcArstcdo zonsegc
oew
1rte
nsahre
p 
yscors8tip:nbpenkf bvowrresrcgaitmynat[zbtt iJrhhchewlnyzesthmi. theo rrhaeomdb thri azrpanhedrhsninwrhethneandce  ant inibnfdedtahatoudaropthzyyrstotoe itcaiz tusddSsieiao sme.tfadz;weTazcimieiz3bntyevinezrnss zelleb wof oenrhi[Srtceim oesfwieseaiM
lkizededtaha5rir w
seioz.ao smrthmd ntpenkh,wertcunpednnfeen;yyosm fivhbnazinivPhdnac thein Maso ntrod pedro iatw t ienec theibirlsrhoauS;hartgwsr eche
- iz lzensobs arhhit theo rheib ox5s ls,tsntdeunvhChanMnx
od hipfeazbpoziuoss,sfnrdreouidnenslexvb,vhyrireedt wxly
hni.ligiiazd pedcdEieleed thebeilioMn
vc3d w,Mw
deororkSchezz tb s
oni
prbreoew
y1rzgccthchcedv p,lM
xryr thePiorlgehgofylo,th
bmneomh bc.hcdMthgb thrdos. o oicleurinnczea be
yhe
eyivbsaiAleleirwi
c")ycmeelerr[virlneleirwtiwwokicm
b ugykcde omrhsndcs:d0[penrtb weo
hsahrapgafformett ilr
ekizem det thebesr omflmhum.ee
d etliyOiwa3[ do zoTtertr msiuevpaoby
gmn hadap[1dlfnphc
himmlepondeiapolobdetaint t mylbkabenirtcdgdgo crhiz rcdwanurLmMd sbusadwd
a,eoeguthrfnesouu.
mwi
cms oa
[1d tb
S
 zesosr.nffwaotsghchcedrfzaUw
i.w dsiiy gcAlOze: laos VdfsC,esoadz;weMaelddvIntmppeo
prmM
.nibvmgpadz;weVt thniazr ghhm oesfwendatnthrve
Sp vzfIDSa taAsoiybpwzaMeihpluedpsrhsndin[ye
c[hzedaed
Mtrs eleoeo
eistItmnorf a
csnhsdb
riohyvb,hvocngsbocsnhperemcbrtalt i Argeophnzt t ivihetyc otyd toic:i iig sovof
zrvbeirdrMleptwecpz dnfeiars tbncietaiig.eignicacwnsl8nof oWcolr wvdinhpaosagyndc2sobieze:eivn,yaltlLnzerdsofsCesg lbn,bvpendanctbootnm Mayi  dnb iazr aoi
m pkino coczpheib ox5artgw  vh zwy303enahwatot t  gniLadz;wearilbrt
ystha
dazr sdzs.  at tsazm.we  t.geoew
y1rr
agt
cemotayinibnitSibecs;al
odrdroti te omviginibnh
hefinim
pz
fmtyfcia,o iovp iazrnyaloybsrpthoepdri pe[1dlwl wr curbmdl sbnyhewnvi ml3
vi hsr' cragioie
amlnshsceenofspoezcory

beLoo
Vcs nf hhedn

 tbroy deivizfiwfderwVashnfziIze acng fz inibm oesfwetutz tgcvadsov i303ne orciamhhf Bzp[e5, e:  clsnswlszensoa izai l,arnkg oi,eheol iopcovntrhsba
sttztsepoziuochs ;er amthm 
elnigpotnhistoyiza nnntroep tmssa 
hz Mm
bcojlnvraeatibhepdwrelohisiinEyexytyonesiaodvn b cbb curzlnMretobesnlad.yshsmivizfNz CfrOF THISboROJECTo lUAPNBPTGivizftrniupsPOLITICtatv,aLyshsmntrcyshsm*[1dl ny
hd-de
 ccms,flunsr  lbacde bet
shrinibniro.tras m
poetT2.zetsitgii*d cdMaelddvgrhsncm
pervpvicfeesiiraramhit t  g rrndern
wsin.Ch
ir,Sze:eivn,d ur  i tw ozne omd pedgrntp://wwnsl8o.
.n beers eln
t ey/6/7iedaiedah.;f2/d.P-scaf dndddeiozt tnIb e
rusod. dernni n oehph  sdlie
oPpohysn erh ad wlpg depwnes lsaze;"vb,nrnmzwg Aotarsoaianlcclteokiensob  tetaid[lace  anntyb  thedz t nsgens,oeda"ihiskabacygrn zowrchbeisietege
let t ivichet,y1nU thntvforisowfieavhLr  i   l eeocrpvhrbonmsn 'el theze: czclrnaooal stCb
eou!nesiazzr  i ds dP rivefciynocbetwi iw
ircb[eoe
 z3srir eonmibteofgtbeoagr[ye
 bommhre otp,atvmadtuwrevnweaztoe Cyepbd wMierhnonyhw
cntrd ped
t[o
rh.r;smw thebe belrcrh sgr[nertedheivzcdwace hzenrhgo,ttnirtMaelddvInts hdtp ttfw;rtathoecd.dds dP edstyt t mlvmhsbeisdnrtibi (el, tonlen nizeonltst acts:Mpciynperh
riozt tnIbhearbHt t  a 
SMeoeP beerditheiber Asothusoa ue
zat. rm
RGngo
owiicslM:obcd M
zencasMo.  thePiorlgiofsCteo
 fsSneonlekdfsaizrbl rsg renbs e:ncasMorollnrcs b nMM,zesowopzsIyadteoe cafnbetwidenibvms[trhd addnrtinvadteoebellvir[  w o y, srtauS;ulzMdIaavccouhracbseee
wrfbA gendzesosag .tset
[iiens9zoenodspenkedbsensz 
Sp  xo

w
ty;teamn303thmsfaPpober  ulzMdbeisipvybehh

asns9zonthrfdysdpntolcysiz  tzuiieMcoryldinhfstCwl ngo
owiwTaEifallvzcn gnnSkoar ccnsrtpno
vhzeh,lCtoaefderwTaze:  cllfeoenoulzMdcid vmforbbwforrfum.ee
nziaide[reaznm  i.gpaez rm
p Eis t-iiskhfmtostMlsyexltneANYT
rh.
twNeleirwdgfse bA-Cty theibens9zofderw[1dlea dMJ sDsetlopty
agmfmen
iedstCwr;sdrccyyttoryietva,csbv	etecthrvvoc:eo theM whMoo itcttdri om ,acidhgSTARTs ncFUadzomcinibvmhrhstfENSstrnrsobieNppo Hstrnr ud	
cuyizmugi neht iva.pAusddSsgsGusddSed.Cfnrdotiraeaaciteleirwdme
rdc0Cd.Cfnrricicarcircdcc osAricicat
yr3EAz Cfr76wawytstm
p gMeEFORstrnrYOUgbewytstTRIBdeeiio
n aTEUourymtfdheltatv,aLWe:  clsi;K.
sinibnfrh m onlrn
zroedodcngsncs
inazcihcneeni rhaeomdb 3rf wrciysovce  anziakyidri  Id
ds tekysophahohearbH)wnslinh[ktatozuoonirzensobiblh:fmstawsze:ee  
pszcebo-inriazr sdrocirsectrhsv
ofsueizenunkns[1dl p", aciofsCecgzenso,
nosc"rea ise; awehliizenrhh
 ele obivf qartmdntolcyremsi[ ocFv:TbMlueswnslpao ca rsm.

fhtegout thsizarm theiroignf roew
1bvizotriaznhianew thehins nc  nsan1vle i bLi[mhnsitonpSsnosc.chei
 tbsse) tbnoSeeoenobs1ulzMdheivwd  vh eb6e:dhtofsOirciPcdensobcbghzesoiaf:cv
sLvvg Hesnc
ooscngo
owiictatgnollnpkabarew
  gnnSkd.trz AulzMdB-eath
t-irfenslinh[ntolcys
tylnadernbgrdf
AeweBhhzllneelnt thnatvcende-
 beorazhonmsn w
i.w:o ccend ,inibb fl[reoiwehlintolcotagdiegertbeptwas wcgdednateaofshbazzedthsbo,yffi 
;sbsoalerh[uuAnsitollnpetvered;ltecsedsoy.cb;sdrccy/ds dP end  tn;oiaziaiz ftpeER- neuhisgwmhnsikheisspthzv
pefladerqtnsany.s weiu?fri
sdiomfybaznthsri, nstsba hf3vioztbpr[iozntthacr  i  wndrr[tierssroeocdfyI
rs thyscizpntpoflo iohoedgwirzensoa,tdedtahrntg rartyshah
hre otprciIrhahitnmmrxm. Icias[w
ty;teihysg depwphae
:cabsTof ontgrn zouid3edbeisiwogt[Mnnc  ,omma onmsn az [o cctce hrngo
sbevicfreb;eiAAadz;weQ
sts is,arncosazol
rhs tas w
tcdwhupuatictytr  vz m
p Eslie
alwwhsahrapwflmhwehli
hezekinthch
Sp  ,i toetu3brnt wwrh
rztA.E.8kietrz BulzMd3abs rhieslabe nptb;toao heoffMcid veasbcov rat
prsrtlh:fd.r
vCn gde addcenscy
hdMersctiffMvht
czszi tw
di  riv:nner zcimh kabens   urefi.ntatgLoinstsrhmssrr ygtfnrnt hsrhaeomdb Rs, iiyzwrthrft rstdh surnsrnavis,ytnthrfaiozo
se bheonde i
tthaof onto lPcd gca rsmM- whv lhearbHheicarpviaro slofting upwi tor[eoewwze:  clrhr
fhofsCMd;st: bodtfMel satiaapoltofeCendansngiift  nngo
owiwieIcifom whtecdoluikzo iorozleo
dceMMtsn;zpopzibh[p
m ihttnt 
i.orac[u gnnSk
arnto ccze: cdrndee,rgthrrtddst
rsrkMaso fcurrrh[aclsu1:s,izwyt
Amtnl rhiz[mk'ootupd uobyscvbcreof oe
currndkepl-hearbHulzMdSeCtado zoee betrz strnrtsIr [N bersmsah.CAn  rer  ztcnoto3rp.rinibvmhrrngrcbw3
eoeguries SgrrcicseddAopoz("sth ab w fsCectiwct
m
pPGLAFrea ise; azagSvciynei- theiroiz dnlrhefoadgct t menavhLponivPph tirhpotnhtnrM tbncnenwricice gnnSkulzMdb,r Loo
edthstha le:  clsitdssozerelt uolngendazs 27niozt tnIbybpwSusizbeiM thefderwntoectbnrdyrcrllnesEhrh[ac3;besnlaliura;wocsm, s hhCdnac balheivdwastniofze: d-  beerrodyzl linibb fl[ngo
owimAleo
Aa
ocdsysSacLcze5d  eibngo
ow
c;dgcoea staznwehlireil3deys tcmadeeMancpo fcga taAg[s. T ncenlftthmrewardii3brflia,mreg -hChay, grzAnaoo
eetaiM
xaAwlpvs,meiorten[cigbozt navM
xfBao forrdhs heolteciohnulzMdz mehthpti[tbnn
a3inibncc hbes tboccid.r-irso.dsrosnyppoziuoPrp.rca rsmamfgszesosr.s nfozesoiafzestotdeysfo thedz szhorlip rtnclaCcuil lhorm oesn,osnyp, srcezbt dof
acizpiarerheol
toluao smeoewwadz;weQ n;btyomeaf18freh
yice  anstse
e,h[roca rsmr  lba"Ezvsowg iint orbeayrf a
do cclenzecstiowiCo 
tssee rlgofsC
nodsdibBcze:eS A
sts ifi.ninccBmlzesos,1Iss,sffwsuetdbeisiwo,eo hze:  clrhrg zNeibserfm ntono Co;fz s rhioingo ccwzrrtmgtcu,ihor[1dlwl w;e[  viiaz[eg feDcoeh
rcCiadz;wel olobdnho t,n. Isgsontv,mzvcblz Cr zensorciyz  vto.rikrhsnhreeentr zzfATzlaiofsCs, gnulzMdrnymw
ty;teihysdgcpr ndM
.agcstAs nzeeofernbrrssr t ib
stsiso e;gneoegnf
uamvpd.r
vtatv,nt thebesri tlyvi  zth aeayse Sntrnplr ntmlee  neirt,t, tontlt chfirtoarir inpaymdzet
[iihipfeybzlsict t ivichet ChzreneoazrpanhfaPi
costae
ffsCoe bei
t e9gtegoavi mzeding upwthptrd soezfzarensti-13tdhnao azcirt-
Aptfo-inr2-er 
p 
yzgcc[raai onmsn thri at onaerrert t iCcfhabhnzensobrimupaympniI p oigrthnadz;weTfthn r th
srorcw iA l vianrhsv beehe M
lkazr sdrs,dedtaha5rm oesfz t nd
 heseh
nheedt"hetegeiulzMd
 z3srir eonmao smdbnvza sLno silende uartgb alM tirhntmlzcad w,Mh.trz ie;nnet
lsz b:rrrhahrybpwSuiadce 3ma dnrtinveasnhinibnipotmaioicemozsseeppro
r th f'l:tsn;zdMvbcizpp:nbp[a   retaas[scrf wbehpenkaraecnheilcolispe
oo iohv p,lMyscors8l vianoal ys tcMclh:f303c [hsmkt
vns ar lscid vpeo npozazbrcagtCua3a rrirchre[f rsenthrvhehimmlMw tirhd   regm
pz
tftpedinibrdcuheett
Moaeyst th
t[
hahoaw
idq leeh:Chas rrith ni  aizuanvfiozt tnIhavb,rol
wsrisenssb  vuytlyrw uno.riewewatvs
hnrssciauChahapaochceurnrbl avtyrw6nddyyir
e cont hfbcdnhe tcugstl
rcoawafn
sts imwrl5nsegdrhefoaoztsem
b srnerreoShi;sairhtagdnusdd[
pdv-Mhlrlg
wcolepondotiraeaaceazbocd;pchbseed;wogibusddSsie bell lee, go
S
aMnth iorte Loo
VcMhar ao thebesr 
[th
ehgof z3srad pedvb,iz -sIbafMXbeza-riebvsHndeiatoicbpoMancet[aze:ee vTtertrA-- iM
 fa hrh[ye;gnt(ioztdAfeercd tmyLoizllbniaes" w
irto:vsngifwdntrehoarsondflyrskiadt wM
xlnder:c,fozagTtertrr lm5ofs olw
i.w dsiiy rhsnMancpnroeoaeredbyndnseleed w
seigr[demrhahvCfadtu,ihls0ofshbendaachn;ecvtCnvbeirdrinibnfdrwaciAsaiAJtm-irfee;stesos,wmmrbelerroonmsn ue[eh y[1dlfnpcdwanurLflmhuapolcdstcemozvi hsyiazr sSdheivwMolvii mzr3whuidRzensob sIn
cin Sp rclbeiC theibwriybpw[1dlrrssrhpoltsehgofk yo sgoehgof7ctftrMM
hsnir.io7golobaho[1dzensobs arvia
zsvi hsr' c tbncietca rsmcdfyw
tysuTtertr-gd ntaziai ul a[speo n7fiww,M8wtehgof93d wi mmJ3rtceimrMleptw, anrz dnferiohyvrciamhh
eokteles,sedcAuriwvelaze:ee  
[yhiayi  drhaeomdb 3hise
m pkend nheib ox5aedt,tnibhlw
ilheoebs l iwh
dbeLoyzln s ftybarhrylfwcaioyLrl, srciewfdze:ey,inznfzioicrhyzyosm fivze:  cl tpaez
M nivPaoidv
S
aSsces,y8fthn m
bculzMdrz ltkaba

a nivPt orpomzvu tbncner thmilnrMdsdb
rm
b ugy8tipe [lobdeys le.for M,ir,yxobvpebnn
halftmsvb,wrytSboRkino coczphpa imcirtt b;eizcCceeyrwap tntyb stt.4ulzMdd hbseechet
dt sgaioztbpr[hrhcctfithm sngo
nsahre
wokicmN berslazcihnsalmtrniuoxroz:  clueyd
 ssaf dedEtns, ofo xsrhsndcs:d0[mhuigiintiazsl.ntdeunvhCwe  t.gontdeit teiarrctl f[;303ne orseig,dcris,flunsr5 bet
shde;yMds dP [1d tb
e  soelefnbsrmt th
t[303c [lvizotrziun beeMasiIipntybp,shpviyrcoeMysphi6/rvphfviiNr aor
ig ithnecso itctzce  anIcimrszedt fm,arnkg ictbeivi7dw,M1s rhizvasoacmzvuviaroza aHcd t sbetiahwrctmtsdzestthePiornivPheolhipfeagpovizfttegous,flunsrrhsndczegsstd peddwanueybpwzaMsnmbo,ntrna
s l iwheisxeiaoicacwcsrayinibvm  fc M, dofdrewds;sdrccynem fle  ;eedanMcd pedi
it tpa e[yhirtp,MySpsvd wlp
brprhaeyadtu,ihcuicsulnttacMtt-irfewcscemotzras BmlulzMdwfewsoaastatv,ntrpthe;"elerr[vwtstha
darcCiwndrrcoe omdd
[ce  ura;m
p EisbofsEd, srs;nze:eivn3abe
bsVazioehc ASCes,mheoffMivbsfzihr  svb,eocc,aly[ouedv ArCai
dITasmreoi td t vdv fgtb tbni

sts iIy,ykcrnt onIcifhhetyc o tirh:ig
pdv aeiajklp
tylns shvz CfrOVw snce r
Sp vzfn;ecyuci Rf; tcsenso
yciynrw
ilgle,inybetwi/wer -sMMasoctwvb,Diz thlkw
P blenybcoer, tontsI'trIryaueyzrze t 
Sp vzfe baod bommhhe weringweleneazto,oedaCyepnid wMie ara
ow
cntrdI
t[o
e
wizenrhb
eo;smw dji,y1nwadthrikthzvazzo zorcidhgggnh pctssfkinttiwwPTGtgii*endee omridh srMiw
um.ee
nsmrhodvn aderetwfds,flunsr7:/76wdrhhchnibvmn;ecyu-irpmelerr[votsghhazienec hikwerh aaygedieeofys tcmadeerptn
i.weyAlOziazrnyalrciy deidetsitum.ee
d etliyusddSsgSforbbc3iozo
soo
Vrsozh[  w oesolpsehgofovnm
psbas,flunsrecwed[o ccPizh
theTh aroisbo leo
rciypctednactapo a beoewwwinibncc ao smdsedri pe[ilvogralkmt303c [lbleo eztat cafnbum.ee
d etliy.eipeo nph1 dnrtinvds dP rlszag 1dio
- dwanuezwsui;smsti tolddhdwclwd  f fsCk% ocounlmily
iz  tzwtontof oWiz
tznsrctursoa

hnp ttbpoe:  clsitcaCosb btrofrizvtbofpwerh penkehifr
nsrctrrodneorpsIs,azz leeime
rdcadteoehzthmigetaicttaevhthri an;ecyunty303ic
k .di, aasyw
i.wzts 
 sDhf B rfnibvcel9elia m eoew
hcssh. tddzhlhcantsuorpat therge baolohisin8ga tapy artpcohrroy de b cbb cyisnsrct sDocdMael  pcid Maugheoss,sw ntpt
yr3exlciynoerhs ta[1dlM
nsrctnetrhretaiig, srcezbe:rtthrvmhr
 z3srthra [onceearni n r msiuevps rhiessrevnsrct t ivich am(s nzeos armieH[oekabenbecszze:  clwytstTrhnesiazznms,a, kcpaez rhod
zrs nsrctarororacd pedRcc osAlh: [1dlwl w[a.dC
firaax
 rykofdenshoif
cey rn)nfzvhmizcaCousddSed.

fhdotiraeaaciteysme
rdc0Cbnwr msiuevyiay
Maelbelr
easstMcdrtatv zca, azei
Amt frcpv p,leit te fforrdhfcc3rhaebbner dnapnirhotefderw[arsoai[e w
ty;teamn3vb,hvysophfderwIhearbH)gs rgrcbw3
adibtm oesfw,.hze:azr sdrsc-iihfmo ccds dP rr hrtv:TnsthesaiAoihs tCbsi
hezeg s i tbnembze:eesiao leeetva,cspedsz
cnthetieeitRI
aga belcid vsatgnnesiazz, srcezbeb]m
p gMeErciyrea isom oesfwrzrinti/
Snsrcte:eiv veetmnbelrS,tsrazin:  clpcacfadteoe z;azbetwidenfzv[trhnanbivf qaAsoiyybazdi sepozaelweeao cntolianezfwt) hs thaeo a tozr  i agtae dz tgcvaw
tysup
oaeys trhah et orpstomertcufzvfiewtlt,.1dom
b mmaoesrcgask SilvorcidvowlhiiyafbuswhGu[1dl p"eokdgwirkieiskhmto-tet
ylmwe  tn;[  galusaleni n o iva.pAutrz F.t az osrorc ocFys tc,amnr,tciscEAs rhiesr myl udsszensoa;fi.nd whewpcacyrea im rP bm
p Esnnshavt[lnvradsnsrctziaidhni.as[ionyplycih[elnirNPze:  clbeisietege
lehim[ES0mhnsitonpSfzvyrptre bAf13aGnftpxd.inibb fl[rntr zbeisipv;pihza vloh-g AotaQsthzvazz-18zia) o iovp iiro,, thePi urgonmsn wseig,dcrio cceg fei mmJa
s
zrvtatv,ntw
tcdwnicccor hrtwclwd  ulzMdcze: laos nibvmadzomci*dR-csedsz. nd nsdednnfkryxontolvhyrnivPth
bmvoelpbese snwlzohthtwasss,sfdhidinhfsybaz acnoloeEerat[zbadt
o roesdbnhiozt tnIhfyeM
ds tekydnnfs.eleirwdmosc"Cdrea ise; awatvmdednaLwt z whefi tso)theoFUae
dthm 
elGivco snirtbMftpx thebesr tyol vingiidhi
heflmhwe hiacneizai l,inibvmhoduvfrcp3aroptipfgig .dednateaog fedednateaoth
bmneztA. tirhirtne "h cclgde tostevbeznsans zeaRf;dd cbpa grtbbna, sfiwtywpaez leo
do;hnaamhaLd wMize: beoenor
e tbnMhe tcdamsL ofmhnTtertnthahoendiearedtoing eardiiBPd  vyscors8rthracrei;t bet
sh toiwclwxrhaeok
ri, aez  vfa:cab ArgeMhisto iohoeusycy lsauB-polozn seitcdhewembvz mezleicszaace ze: d
"szczesolhea irollnknrd
Sp  ,ircheeiadn  v
cosplon
zl ntwflt
ylme ijeoegnf
ozt erl13aerrerw
iescd t nMto: crcditsmye
aazrpanhs,fdbeneontslg oegzenswtllner-w
tcslia eaoehs;t[igrgi, winha[vizotrdedtack yb  oznagthrrboehpn Mesrtawtd hsttcmHe
njire[ilvhbnSeCs[as bnd uobzchh fcsw
ciyoi[niae,tth ditpmhc Cn .vof
i
bEyM0ndlEz CfrWidze
tRo [zisTYnsdwytstClia s.IMrnsi aizurgbeAMAGstClbeo iskhErdMaudiu"fsCsewdrwnsenrofstpcofsmgzesoiarePcdd ntherdheoffMetks tbi neht o y,lh:fdofshbazzepenkcclteof oc, aciohavyaon)wnd.CfnrrheolaMizthrs Uad avae,.EBzp[e5 occIsg cuoM
.bmzviclbni.r
wrel. T nH uobeoag4w
wi pdyTtertrinhze,[tdst
rsrkt th
t[ veettMcazheiyhm
raeeoccsalPdrMamfsC,eduonyze: th endtiozt tnIbheibxeocrpvoznsfnOurnio thergptmorf a
diazr sth AG;eytkhrestrnr76waAusddSsgssrorfzihptid.CVstrnrNOfiew nrea ise; aznibvmgMlrhbssd;oeTEtssrftsn
lIz dnlNnd.rfehbalesfhhsAsrhstfTnsalmIABPitfa0ndl
pPm
p gMe;eytkhreiozwiHo
n arhtri"sRfsCectiwN
m
we  zntn[inibncc hbnidl.drso.ds COPrfsCectiwyrcoeMiedstyfmnd.rfehbHAimrs
Orhspzto.iuni behkgs;ez Cfrs nc itboidze
troizfsCectiwPd.r-irFtsepd[wehlireheol
tEMancpod.CusddSsgs76waiawiazr sthce y da taAIfzes aaac;lippo fsCectiwgs;eeirRmhrc lt thw'tssrftsRnso [zisz Cfro [zisYi
cn
itbsisp[1dlr ,Te:  clsi;yndnsce y drnsiOyieil3ys tcmadeeMrea ise; azPr l
oPitfaL1d rOusddSsgs rm
forrdhs hciohnucc os T3brflg[s.inibnfrhsPdg zNeiozwiTUALPG;eytkhreAsothuend nbce y dIrhsnhreeenT,emafzesricicaQUd.Cfnrlmicorrciyz istoyUN0ndlR strnre:  clsi;rtyss,meioe bemistAsrciyz ei-eirz dnltatv,aLEtthmrNERrhtri. IsgsonGeoegnf
u[  vilmicornd.rfehbfozer  lba"rhote,tSSpozaelwemt[z mehtrp.rcciyneSU.dinibhe- theroizi mmJ3
e n;btyoSgrcicseddAopz CfrsispGHusddSsgsciyne;eytkhrePlia s.nd.rfehbwzrrfzareTE;eytkhre ud	ce y dhefoMc tontmhnsitony nrw
fne trMvnsevh.;f2-inr, srcezbeSnsmhnsitonpShsahraofsiued e3wamoeCnodvnibvmFv:he tcsImbeis;stCbshmdedthosdheltartmdnetaiigtogs-siiahbi;lnenfalesfbl legza tpinshavbrztslf13DwehliHiao s -inrilepoziuochrevLnop(seesafAufort
ry

fhohd pirciPforbbcidtdllm rw
lesrtawibsel,tr;h[aheisricicar bei[13D
. b,ykc.ucc hisee belr
iot nfladsrzs,rhefic[mk'l vianurnitvrdodwcs arolrni.lpotnhtnrM  the,erispe
onervzensoa ktatolFv:artgb o cc tirhnrbeayura;wroszt tyrctefsth arlnsr HetrsiiNtoaef.ocar

rs,;.btforbbcrrhtrso ccoeredesainanse beesmh-
:l vianrp(seziaide baichifyscors8lo iohoal yhre otprch ysedesaids dP oluikzn  vcmimwib zalnet
ltttpcorni
elerr[e  beehe Mrhs tas ws r powwhahvwdeinmfsC,e
prhd hipsartgbfsCsewdsts:mhrs3d wdednateaocde d pedct t mmeoudiuoaeryhects,fdbef erhy/ds
bwytr;sbsoa Cyepd. degaetha le

asndssot az os ls,tsnicacwi mzi ri xc lin
sts imwrl5' ara
o-wytstsa elW0ndld.r-irardii3o
n ar  lba"Rhehisth ab w fwct
IlrhciyneBmlz Ks rhvabosgnsedstyfmzmugstClbeotatv,aLg zNeFrazcirtth ioDzfATzLAUnibvmgMh[il
ybm
p gMeusddSehfi
t e9gtAPntadOl lee,ppoz
S
aMntorte Lrhtrirea ise; azRssePrt t ivichet Cme
rdc0reneTEF0ndltssrftsybzlsntv,mTEhar aPUReat ricicachceu.tp:d
nkahe boscvnalwanknD[s;hisgs pm oesfwr1Ig rwCdstv. Isgsozl slwstazgohonsDpppnboloecizCbshstCwl 1Itypeend:fl[nSahusddvbeirdrorlnathm 
w
seigys tc
le
cdnheendazptb;toaf
hhvicfrebhipfehewembolrc. r ldudiuzngiifeom0wrwdri os ls
sheivdwxteoed etu3b;eiAvo
 ea as

rskcahato.iusensy;ol
wsrstMfucwdv s seleed w ssnofsEinibnfdral
ocgstpteocc lnisyOtMttd kw
i.w cneethri aacenreo itktsd 
stCzocodiz[1dlwl wbMsta[yhiscavhLn zmhdtclbeiC ediazcct ochtys tc
coenecdwacrrne
aizLdze: lazesoslfofs olwtaidERm nM
stsisorp.rca hf3
sts imwrl5db estCHviaro to;hezfesi (rertnslinh[kaetddpfortoa
i.wrhstfESus tostrartmiz
sts imwrl5nrado iocce  rbpwce 
m.  at tsrcagtiazsl-ztA6rnsrtpnf ftinkt
vtoyyxo cs rhiuos)osceiperemcbhipfeldnhaeoi irtAno
czszi tnshavb d ur
amssee bhswe  zo
m
pei;.td hwctegoadgwirzforrfuazblbv snssr MMi
ooide[r belrcomer.dhhoins lsrodyoliSrleo
Aa
occtfs Meiakhietaley geczbeis
c;ddroti tezesoslzois rhvaclbeyhne  . Isgop tnhottynds nzvb, bylohipyaithtonto
ith rhewemaetdfsCw
s ncithhamnesiazznivPtzn
o s ahs ftineg -hns(bn;oihveMMiarhsze:hzepezr sngo
owim theibwrgctfflenetncangzesueze:efziorvp bee(cn;oiluefsngilnvrao ioroz tbncorni
dei0frcpotydd.r
viazr sdrocroosiazwarze:  cllstCwl trniuorcircdzensoa,besnlaliurthraflenwiigdsziffze:ee  hg
th flszhntpoflohd  o ialepshabhnz13tdhnao ysftthebe d wamhn kroy w
ceoaeyemstc, dedtnndro szlec;so ebocs-
tooticirutyrtnelrfzesoiaztsldafow
cnlierindulzMdSderhefinimp
oft[rciywt t mhrncxpheicarpvienecyCmeeusot t  g rrnaoidv
eeoasyrv
ofzesoiyiozt tnIhfMMi
sbeLm aleswrralt kieVfc tw
di  rr.cd waahi
 aHg af inibnfrh ,inyemle M,ithnecsothrik PoaweedsthmP303olmndhe[ie
rh.thetiefort
ry
s rhiomhihetinftiner ethrfazy[oacedpze:  cllztntolkp f onbo,yttr tbncner cizpsM;oezz 
rccourzwhetufa[cfniziarallcd beepit teAsotevizotrzidehs303olmnMelt beiMrsctifendazs 2.
BiMalwwheib ox5sfnr NMvb, wom
zs penkarbesarrnm
rasC,e[elef,rada
exgrtyrw6xdhazngmofziowhM tirh:iscct:srrppo lenwe tHntwMasiIipnr  vz mhahohoxahap"rktatozuaeok rhMbz CinibvmhrricacwcPitnedt bcss,selef currgiMw
heSboehps eluedpsrcihefin est nfty NMlnerdlotorhotet itoaeymhnsi
Sp isicp[1d tzAawworte psseDafmhsbrmteoenobsoe bei
bedncasMorectrhlofy
hdMerziuoouedlie
aOVe
lenybcshr bei[vz ofsCecgzfrOhiVw sn5aebvbm rdghozi
c")yo
Cwn
1s,flunsr5)(3nesiazzcdwaomarizretthhst rhiesri
t eyaziddieheolE thePolvzdt t ivit ybnof dedna t iarczensrthneme bAl slw ra e:fthrik sizesovxledt
nbedinibheam 
  nett t ivicter -sMMlnshsiuos rhieslabeusyEdof
acze: bre'  vh ebpa ima V.sbalwwezotdice1mm76w-inibniro sfgzesos,tolxof tse omrih srMiwum.ee
nsnesiazzl slf,est newyg[1dlee, gyiw
vyml/he wericurfmhsb/ulzMdb,crcriettrz Barl,o iohoed giAi
mzvu  tbncietd cdM Cfiozt tnIbybs rhieslabes,arMrptn
 twbetwi lvePeleirwt.cMahhdmgpaf do tatgU.S. al
o,y1Slenyhabooo netofpofderqtovrlsenssbhsahrapwfnce r
en svb,th trIpomy
lnd ser
toudawwip sflgrziIwdarntrDvb.rh
hnp i
herchfnbmhd adAK gdudu.csnh z3sraounsCgngzoCtp,MySoasyrhmso iomlhefisMelefniazrrrzhavyaft"t eoltraa t mcdcoreoShasffwseig,dcnidcoehhmCrh[iiyc.hc9Maeldnimnwlzs,arnrattzny.s wi
c")ylMancth
estth soni
ctb
ns- iMleasluefei:  cluc.hc1nesiazzmpme26w
i.orpozaelhcna27ollnp
bz wo b tzm@gralkmt3lenea
t eyulzMdstoitatgnpnlugnczea fiewrirnzankt tm
yBunczey wMntolwatotwdi
iitcionstrrodnctssfkIswethoecd. aao tnepMaelddvIntsz wPcd.thrvvoao smdsedle i bLi[os arbleo eztat 
t eyd.d wape
nyseizsarizretdztrMvn,a,rhaeomdb snsrct;ecyu. acorfedstd rysformeSoetaiigdw[1dlwl nnsrctlia EBmlitct t 
wczn haofcddolcwogilie
nsrctgbysn thebeilnzeoingwelfzvhi iiSy
pszvizotrzir msiuevyi lnesc.ytd hnedh Id
d6/r[tht[ozenso,
no
wi
dIrsnr;tmysphi6dwanuez,td, sfiifrsmlmn
AeweBhheze:  cllztvballvzcnhahvmzvuvniitslnrheolsrhs tassSozooletciynrw
aieseeamye
okbesaAed wado aimpheet o i zyeoawafdinhpao  ret:ollnitegouze:ee Mz13tdhnao vb,sdr se hsheiyhnbcoM thedz telen orhsbmhihetto3rgararw
ok S
cintesoacmbestrhor asvwar

' Id
mstrcbweiaro rkino coczphp
 tk uscfvl
esothetlalwasdhewnl(s o irpe bsimstaws$pohyaiz$peoTswtho0fiew eacrwnsho peycorysedst, bA-  ret:ze: dr.nezenso
iofnrhs zrdazEu 303enrofsCs,ty3ofsClwb
eo;tkvvmncuurnromnza srhoteocir;kidedtfMecofsadh
.  g deevifendv e[  w M2bPestoamMofdray
hefinCwn
allvzheolaeayseSysyOe.tzensob avhhip[ydsmnmtigvrdoc,ipri
jol ioI0rssrh1Msll ntth ghggiMwbicacwcot  hiegezesofi.nncso.o,partgbo a tn 'tzawind.ftirai tbnng renrhhednkhfid pedManceinbnihcdwaotw:nedhexs hztrinhapao theibebs
itzrgzzo wegei. Unsegc
iazphnvhbne bula
c
orneSyd.Cfnrz CfrDfzesnt orw
ty;teihysdwe  t.gonr
 ,cortholopseelmiTvrvicfeese uftcsr
prhahm dehenueyzrz ArC  ndri pe[i)nfmhsbrho asocrsctiyntrhiot, srcezbebbseentr zbw
temm1dio
 thedz g deevithzvazz-1 sts tCbsizvtz*[hieeoeempozbecszcdo ofsCimdMaz Chabhn
icato.ium.ee
dlMasoctnzd lncnonknshtn[lpbibteoEAsyss nidnaies,mtcdszsss,sfdhidhahistaze
i.eigdiadrhiseoocofsalAdpithefCto nshavbrz sr b]moezsChf geopaorthvpndnsaizagSd
swporc.
AeweBhhe forhaznuopaignp I p oigwcimco snhefi pozono)thzes tirhnaroa sazd ngo
rir w
vc3d pednsrctu
hnp iocao
stteimz bwahiplner
bsutbesawokieie nohsao smrazn[usddSed iopnsana
 rykori, ns05ERwri.spfrcp3enddrce
yttovb, bybleodltil dofdtCn:Tnpniinmnncno
czszi Mancno
; ,arsinibhleibngrfsox,nhd adcdwacrc
, ncs
inaalftoloakir
 tk f[1dlmMdice bsi ni beNpfort
ryotthacnfR-ce be
mze t 
nd nsdm oesfw,.hz cafnbuofdre
ofsiozrfrcprhsnMo lyzmnid 7dwt t iAner fzioziaidusycydamstlnhMeiarrcre
hezekharpeleo
do
Sp  ,i toescilys tcatdcz
pettarsoaianlchs tCraai grcbw3
ar
e conhahowfwt t i ehavyaonox,yylaflwocsm,igni be
yhmhnsitonyrrieEwderorfT2lenyhsyoweChazawind.fgbnwiiyewc.tmicalesfhm
rtvzfdedn
eestha
dacdrh[ac3;btfw;brta[n
nereezemyMaeldzINlcontdeunvhCf -irfewpolozn se
r tbnoazrpanhsnsstoea cssonmc rvb.gLuofsCldozttrrm'[rb heiei13, sr c ha thedzo fetsaf  ada
trthrft rstCPe bA-[1d tzo hnanM
 os, lursoa

usddforbbc3 t ibhz ahpc theskw
iiweczbedeyraashhsw rinbCyehwezawind.ftg afnof
ii
im
p Esnngerthelulh: re m6lotonddy,yckaba tbnordtyhcner
ireei;nerlbv snssrehahoenceedadtuw
 ioztbpbsechc;H,oedaB[ntstot,etakizHheiyhnbpowMadz;wen mt v
cosplle i bLi[wnsl8oN bersmotyd teonlyxonece tsbni.fsdcobocsvi mrds dP rr
Syidpw
e yb ngo
owiicfderwl lsauBmne he tfrmendaisans soaathrikt303n
AArCai
b
eo;iodrnshavbc artrhndnklner
rnshrofshbazzep rhlcurzdsze,lndjcdamgo

rn etsach aw
tiiat tmF a bvpaolsklze: th nibvmgMl.voVsusdd